<h2 class="c004">I</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">If it had been possible for Theodore Savage
to place on record for those who came after
him the story of his life and experiences, he
would have been the first to admit that the
interest of the record lay in circumstance and
not in himself. From beginning to end he
was much what surroundings made of him;
in his youth the product of a public school,
Wadham and the Civil Service; in maturity
and age a toiler with his hands in the company
of men who lived brutishly. In his twenties,
no doubt, he was frequently bored by his
clerking duties and the routine of the Distribution
Office; later on there were seasons when
all that was best in him cried out against confinement
in a life that had no aspiration; but
neither boredom nor resentment ever drove
him to revolt or set him to the moulding of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_10">10</span>circumstance. If he was destined to live as a
local tradition and superman of legend, the
honour was not gained by his talents or personal
achievements; he had to thank for it
an excellent constitution, bequeathed him by
his parents, certain traces of refinement in
manner and speech and the fears of very ignorant
men.</p>
<p class="c006">When the Distribution Office—like his
Hepplewhite furniture, his colour-prints and
his English glass—was with yesterday’s seven
thousand years, it is more than possible that
Theodore Savage, looking back on his youth,
saw existence, till he neared the age of thirty,
as a stream of scarcely ruffled content. Sitting
crouched to the fire in the sweat-laden air
of his cabin or humped idly on a hillside in the
dusk of summer evening, it may well have
seemed, when his thoughts strayed backwards,
that the young man who once was impossibly
himself was a being whom care did not touch.
What he saw with the eye of his mind and
memory was a neat young Mr. Savage who
was valeted in comfortable chambers and who
worked, without urgence, for limited hours, in
a room that looked on Whitehall. Who in his
plentiful leisure gained a minor reputation
on the golf-links! Who frequented studios,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_11">11</span>bought—now and then—a picture and collected
English glass and bits of furniture. Who was
passably good-looking, in an ordinary way, had
a thoughtful taste in socks and ties and was
careful of his hands as a woman.... So—through
the vista of years and the veil of contrast—Theodore
may have seen his young
manhood; and in time, perhaps, it was difficult
for a coarse-fingered labourer, dependent
for his bread on the moods of nature, to sympathize
greatly with the troubles of neat Mr.
Savage or think of him as subject to the major
afflictions of humanity.</p>
<p class="c006">All the same, he would spend long hours in
communion with his vanished self; striving
at times to trace resemblances between the
bearded, roughened features that a fishing-pool
reflected and the smooth-chinned civil
servant with brushed hair and white collar
whom he followed in thought through his
work, his amusements, his love-making and
the trivial details of existence.... And
imagining, sometimes, the years and the
happenings that might have been if his age,
like his youth, had been soaped and collared,
routined by his breeding and his office; if
gods and men had not run amuck in frenzy
and his sons had been born of a woman who
<span class="pageno" id="Page_12">12</span>lived delicately—playing Chopin of an evening
to young Mr. Savage and giving him cream in
his tea?...</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Even if life in his Civil Service days was not
all that it shone through the years of contrast,
Theodore Savage could have had very little of
hardship to complain of in the days when he
added to a certain amount of private income a
salary earned by the duties of the unexacting
billet which a family interest had secured for
him. If he had no particular vocation for the
bureaucratic life—if good painting delighted,
and official documents bored him—he had
sufficient common sense to understand that it
is given to most of us, with sufficient application,
to master the intricacies of official documents,
while only to few is it given to master
an art. After a phase of abortive experiment
in his college days he had realized—fortunately—that
his swift and instinctive pleasure in
beauty had in it no creative element; whereupon
he settled down, early and easily, into
the life and habits of the amateur.... There
remained with him to the end of his days an
impression of a young man living pleasurably,
somewhat fastidiously; pursuing his hobbies,
indulging his tastes, on the whole without
<span class="pageno" id="Page_13">13</span>much damage to himself or to others affected;
acting decently according to his code and,
when he fell in love and out of it, falling not
too grossly or disastrously. If he had a
grievance against his work at the Distribution
Office, it was no more serious than this: it
took much time, certain hours every day, from
the interests that counted in his life. And
against that grievance, no doubt, he set the
ameliorating fact that his private means
unaided would hardly have supported his way
of existence, his many pleasant interests and
himself; it was his civil servant’s salary that
had furnished his rooms in accordance with
his taste and made possible the purchase of
his treasured Fragonard and his bell-toned
Georgian wine-glasses.... The bearded
toiler, through a mist of years, watched a
young man dawdling, without fear of the
future, through a world of daily comforts
that to his sons would seem fantastic, the
creation of legend or of dream.</p>
<p class="c006">It was that blind and happy lack of all fear
of the future that lent interest to the toiler’s
watching; knowing what he knew of the
years that lay ahead, there was something of
grim and dramatic humour in the sight of
himself—yea, Theodore Savage, the broken-nailed,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_14">14</span>unshorn—arrayed of a morning in a
flowered silk dressing-gown or shirt-fronted
for an evening at the opera.... As it was
in the beginning, is now and ever shall be—that,
so it seemed to him in later years, had
been the real, if unspoken, motto of the world
wherein he had his being in the days of his
unruffled content....</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Of the last few weeks in the world that was
and ever should be he recalled, on the whole,
very little of great hurrying and public events;
it was the personal, intimate scenes that stood
out and remained to a line and a detail. His
first meeting with Phillida Rathbone, for
instance, and the chance interview with her
father that led to it: he could see himself
standing by Rathbone’s desk in the Distribution
Office, see the bowl between his fingers,
held to the light—see its very shape and conventional
pattern of raised flowers.</p>
<p class="c006">Rathbone—John Rathbone—was his chief
in his Distribution days; a square-jawed,
formidable, permanent official who was held
in awe by underlings and Ministers, and himself
was subject, most contentedly subject, to
a daughter, the ruler of his household. Her
taste in art and decoration was not her father’s,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_15">15</span>but, for all the bewilderment it caused him, he
strove to gratify it loyally; and for Phillida’s
twenty-third birthday he had chosen expensively,
on his way to the office, at the shop of a
dealer in antiquities. Swept on the spate of
the dealer’s eloquence he had been pleased for
the moment with his find—a flowered bowl,
reputed Chelsea; it was not until half an
hour later that he remembered uneasily his
daughter’s firm warnings against unaided
traffic with the miscreants who deal in curios.
With the memory uncomfortable doubts assailed
him, while previous experiments came
thronging unpleasantly to mind—the fiasco
of the so-called Bartolozzi print and the
equally lamentable business of the so-called
Chippendale settee.... He drew his purchase
from its paper wrapping, set it down
on the table and stared at it. The process
brought no enlightenment and he was still
wrestling with uncomfortable doubts when
Theodore Savage knocked and came in with a
draft report for approval.</p>
<p class="c006">The worry born of ignorance faded out of
Rathbone’s face as he conned the document
and amended its clauses with swift pencilled
notes in the margin; he was back with the
solidities he knew and could make sense of, and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_16">16</span>superfluous gimcracks for the moment had
ceased to exist. It was Savage who unwittingly
recalled their existence and importance;
when his chief, at the end of his corrections,
looked up, the younger man was eyeing the
troublesome gimcrack with a meditative interest
that reminded Rathbone of his daughter’s
manner when she contemplated similar rubbish.</p>
<p class="c006">“Know anything about old china?” he
inquired—an outward and somewhat excessive
indifference concealing an inward anxiety.</p>
<p class="c006">“Not much,” said Theodore modestly; but,
taking the query as request for an opinion, his
hand went out to the bowl.</p>
<p class="c006">“What do you make of it?” asked Rathbone,
still blatantly indifferent. “I picked it
up this morning—for my daughter. Supposed
to be Chelsea—should you say it was?”</p>
<p class="c006">If the answer had been in the negative
the private acquaintance between chief and
subordinate would probably have made no
further progress; no man, even when he
makes use of it, is grateful for the superior
knowledge in a junior that convicts him to
his face of gullibility. As it was, the verdict
was favourable and Rathbone, in the relief of
finding that he had not blundered, grew
<span class="pageno" id="Page_17">17</span>suddenly friendly—to the point of a dinner
invitation; which was given, in part, as instinctive
thanks for restored self-esteem, in
part because it might interest Phillida to meet
a young man who took gimcracks as gravely
as herself. The invitation, as a matter of
course, was accepted; and three days later
Savage met Phillida Rathbone.</p>
<p class="c006">“I’ve asked a young fellow you’re sure to
get on with”—so Rathbone had informed his
daughter; who, thereupon, as later she confessed
to Theodore, had made up her mind to
be bored. She threw away her prejudice
swiftly when she found the new acquaintance
talked music with intelligence—she herself had
music in her brain as well as in her finger-tips—while
he from the beginning was attracted
by a daintiness of manner and movement that
puzzled him in Rathbone’s daughter....
From that first night he must have been drawn
to her, since the evening remained to him
clear in every detail; always in the hollow of
a glowing fire he could summon up Phillida,
himself and Rathbone, sitting, the three of
them, round the table with its silver and tall
roses.... In the centre a branching cluster
of roses—all yellow, like Phillida’s dress....
Rathbone, for the most part, good-naturedly
<span class="pageno" id="Page_18">18</span>silent, Phillida and himself talking swiftly....
In shaded light and a solid, pleasant comfort;
ordinary comfort, which he took for
granted as an element of daily life, but which
yet was the heritage of many generations, the
product of long centuries of striving and
cunning invention.... Later, in the drawing-room,
the girl made music—and he saw
himself listening from his corner of the sofa
with a cigarette, unlit, between his fingers.
Above all it was her quality of daintiness that
pleased him; she was a porcelain girl, with
something of the grace that he associated with
the eighteenth century....</p>
<p class="c006">After half an hour that was sheer content to
Theodore she broke off from her playing to sit
on the arm of her father’s chair and ruffle his
grey hair caressingly.</p>
<p class="c006">“Old man, does my noise on the piano prevent
you from reading your paper?”</p>
<p class="c006">Whereat Rathbone laughed and returned
the caress; and Phillida explained, for the
visitor’s benefit, that the poor dear didn’t
know one tune from another and must have
been bored beyond measure—by piano noises
since they came upstairs and nothing but
music-talk at dinner.</p>
<p class="c006">“I believe we’ve driven him to the Montagu
<span class="pageno" id="Page_19">19</span>divorce case,” she announced, looking over
his shoulder. “‘Housemaid cross-examined—the
Colonel’s visits.’ Daddy, have you fallen
to that?”</p>
<p class="c006">“No, minx,” he rebuked her, “I haven’t.
I’m not troubling to wade through the housemaid’s
evidence for the very good reason that
it’s quite unnecessary. I shall hear all about it
from you.”</p>
<p class="c006">“That’s a nasty one,” Phillida commented,
rubbing her cheek against her father’s. She
turned the paper idly, reading out the headlines.
“‘American elections—Surprises at
Newmarket—Bank Rate’—There doesn’t
seem much news except the housemaid and
the colonel, does there?”</p>
<p class="c006">Rathbone laughed as he pinched her cheek
and pointed—to a headline here and a headline
there, to a cloud that was not yet the size
of a man’s hand.</p>
<p class="c006">“It depends on what you call news. It
seems to have escaped you that we’ve just
had a Budget. That matters to those of us
who keep expensive daughters. And, little as
the subject may interest you, I gather from
the size of his type, that the editor attaches
some importance to the fact that the Court of
Arbitration has decided against the Karthanian
<span class="pageno" id="Page_20">20</span>claim. That, of course, compared to
a housemaid in the witness-box is——”</p>
<p class="c006">“Ponderous,” she finished and laughed
across at Theodore. “Important, no doubt,
but ponderous—the Court of Arbitration
always is. That’s why I skipped it.” ...
Then, carelessly interested, and running her
eye down the columns of the newspaper, she
supposed the decision was final and those
noisy little Karthanians would have to be
quiet at last. Rathbone shrugged his shoulders
and hoped so.</p>
<p class="c006">“But they’ll have to, won’t they?” said
Phillida. “Give me a match, Daddy—There’s
no higher authority than the Court of
Arbitration, is there?”</p>
<p class="c006">“If,” Rathbone suggested as he held a
light to her cigarette, “if your newspaper
reading were not limited to scandals and
chiffons, you might have noticed that your
noisy little friends in the East have declared
with their customary vehemence that in no
circumstances whatever will they accept an
adverse verdict—not even from the Court of
Arbitration.”</p>
<p class="c006">“But they’ll have to, won’t they?” Phillida
repeated placidly. “I mean—they can’t go
against everybody else. Against the League.”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_21">21</span>She tried to blow a smoke-ring with conspicuous
ill-success, and Theodore, watching
her from his corner of the sofa—intent on her
profile against the light—heard Rathbone explaining
that “against everybody else” was
hardly the way to put it, since the Federal
Council was not a happy family at present.
There was very little doubt that Karthania
was being encouraged to make trouble—and
none at all that there would be difference of
opinion on the subject of punitive action....
Phillida, with an arm round her father’s neck,
was divided between international politics and
an endeavour to make the perfect ring—now
throwing in a question anent the constitution
and dissensions of the League, now rounding
her mouth for a failure—while Theodore, on
the sofa, leaned his head upon his hand that he
might shade his eyes and watch her without
seeming to watch.... He listened to Rathbone—and
did not listen; and that, as he
realized later, had been so far his attitude to
interests in the mass. The realities of his life
were immediate and personal—with, in the
background, dim interests in the mass that
were vaguely distasteful as politics. A collective
game played with noisy idealism and
flaring abuse, which served as copy to the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_22">22</span>makers of newspapers and gave rise at intervals
to excited conversation and argument....</p>
<p class="c006">What was real, and only real while Rathbone
talked, was the delicate poise of Phillida’s
head, the decorative line of Phillida’s body,
his pleasure in the sight of her, his comfort in
a well-ordered room; these things were
realities, tangible or æsthetic, in whose company
a man, if he were so inclined, might
discuss academically an Eastern imbroglio and
the growing tendency to revolt against the
centralized authority of the League. Between
life, as he grasped it, and public affairs there
was no visible, essential connection. The
Karthanian imbroglio, as he strolled to his
chambers, was an item in the make-up of a
newspaper, the subject of a recent conversation;
it was the rhythm of Phillida’s music
that danced in his brain as a living and insistent
reality. That, and not the stirrings of
uneasy nations, kept him wakeful till long
after midnight.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_23">23</span>
<h2 class="c004">II</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">While Theodore Savage paid his court to
Phillida Rathbone, the Karthanian decision
was the subject of more than conversation;
diplomatists and statesmen were busy while
he drifted into love and dreamed through the
sudden rumours that excited his fellows at the
office. In London, for the most part, journalism
was guarded and reticent, the threat of
secession at first hardly mentioned; but in
nations and languages that favoured secession
the press was voicing the popular cry with
enthusiasm that grew daily more heated.
Through conflicting rumour this at least was
clear: at the next meeting of the Council of
the League its authority would be tested to
the uttermost, since the measure of independent
action demanded by the malcontent
members would amount to a denial of the
federal principle, to secession in fact if not
in name.... Reaction against central and
unified authority was not a phenomenon of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_24">24</span>yesterday; it had been gathering its strength
through years of racial friction, finding an
adherent in every community that considered
itself aggrieved by a decision of the Council
or award of the Court of Arbitration, and for
years it had taxed the ingenuity of the
majority of the Council to avoid open breach
and defiance.</p>
<p class="c006">Before open breach and its consequences,
both sides had so far manœuvred, hesitated,
compromised; it had been left to a minor, a
very minor, state, to rush in where others
feared to tread. The flat refusal of a heady,
half-civilized little democracy to accept the
unfavourable verdict of the Court of Arbitration
was the spark that might fire a powder-barrel;
its frothy demonstrations, ridiculous
in themselves, appealed to the combative
instinct in others, to race-hatreds, old herding
feuds and jealousies. These found vent in
answering demonstrations, outbursts of popular
sympathy in states not immediately
affected; the noisy rebel was hailed as a
martyr and pioneer of freedom, and became
the pretext for resistance to the Council’s
oppression. There was no doubt of the extent
of the re-grouping movement of the nations,
of the stirrings of a widespread combativeness
<span class="pageno" id="Page_25">25</span>which denounced Federation as a system
whereby dominant interests and races exploited
their weaker rivals. With the meeting
of the Council would come the inevitable
clash of interests; the summons to the offending
member of the League to retreat from its
impossible position, and—in case of continued
defiance—the proposal to take punitive action.
That proposal, to all seeming, must bring
about a crisis; those members of the League
who had encouraged the rebel in defiance
would hardly consent to co-operate in punitive
measures; and refusal—withdrawal of their
military contingents—would mean virtual
secession and denial of majority rule. If collective
excitement and anger ran high, it
might mean even more than secession; there
were possibilities—first hinted at, later discussed
without subterfuge—of actual and
armed opposition should the Council attempt
to enforce its decree and authority....
Humanity, once more, was gathering into
herds and growing sharply conscious alike of
division and comradeship.</p>
<p class="c006">It was some time before Theodore was even
touched by the herding instinct and spirit;
apart, in a delicate world of his own, he concerned
himself even less than usual with the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_26">26</span>wider interests of politics. By his fellows in
the Distribution Office he was known as an
incurable optimist; even when the cloud had
spread rapidly and darkened he saw “strained
relations” through the eyes of a lover, and
his mind, busied elsewhere, refused to dwell
anxiously on “incidents” and “disquieting
possibilities.” They intruded clumsily on his
delicate world and, so soon as might be, he
thrust them behind him and slipped back to
the seclusion that belonged to himself and a
woman. All his life, thought and impulse, for
the time being, was a negation, a refusal of the
idea of strife and destruction; in his happy
egoism he planned to make and build—a home
and a lifetime of content.</p>
<p class="c006">Now and again, and in spite of his reluctance,
his veil of happy egoism was brushed aside—some
chance word or incident forcing him to
look upon the menace. There was the evening
in Vallance’s rooms, for instance—where the
talk settled down to the political crisis, and
Holt, the long journalist, turned sharply on
Vallance, who supposed we were drifting into
war.</p>
<p class="c006">“That’s nonsense, Vallance! Nonsense!
It’s impossible—unthinkable!”</p>
<p class="c006">“Unpleasant, if you like,” said Vallance;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_27">27</span>“but not impossible. At least—it never has
been.”</p>
<p class="c006">“That’s no reason,” Holt retorted; “we’re
not living yesterday. There’ll be no war, and
I’ll tell you why: because the men who will
have to start it—daren’t!” He had a penetrating
voice which he raised when excited,
so that other talk died down and the room
was filled with his argument. Politicians,
he insisted, might bluff and use threats—menace
with a bogy, shake a weapon they
dared not use—but they would stop short at
threats, manœuvre for position and retreat.
Let loose modern science, mechanics and
chemistry, they could not—there was a limit
to human insanity, if only because there was
a limit to the endurance of the soldier. Unless
you supposed that all politicians were congenital
idiots or criminal lunatics out to make
holocausts. What was happening at present
was manœuvring pure and simple; neither
side caring to prejudice its case by open admission
that appeal to force was unthinkable,
each side hoping that the other would be the
first to make the admission, each side trotting
out the dummy soldiers that were only for show,
and would soon be put back in their boxes....
War, he repeated, was unthinkable....</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_28">28</span>“Man,” said a voice behind Theodore,
“does much that is unthinkable!”</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore turned that he might look at the
speaker—Markham, something in the scientific
line, who had sat in silence, with a pipe between
his lips, till he dropped out his slow
remark.</p>
<p class="c006">“Your mistake,” he went on, “lies in taking
these people—statesmen, politicians—for
free agents, and in thinking they have only
one fear. Look at Meyer’s speech this morning—that’s
significant. He has been moderate
so far, a restraining influence; now he
breathes fire and throws in his lot with the
extremists. What do you make of that?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Merely,” said Holt, “that Meyer has lost
his head.”</p>
<p class="c006">“In which happy state,” suggested Vallance,
“the impossible and unthinkable mayn’t
frighten him.”</p>
<p class="c006">“That’s one explanation,” said Markham.
“The other is that he is divided between his
two fears—the fear of war and the fear of his
democracy, which, being in a quarrelsome and
restless mood, would break him if he flinched
and applauds him to the echo when he blusters.
And, maybe, at the moment, his fear of being
broken is greater than his fear of the impossible—at
<span class="pageno" id="Page_29">29</span>any rate the threat is closer....
The man himself may be reasonable—even
now—but he is the instrument of instinctive
emotion. Almost any man, taken by himself,
is reasonable—and, being reasonable, cautious.
Meyer can think, just as well as you and I, so
long as he stands outside a crowd; but neither
you nor I, nor Meyer, can think when we are
one with thousands and our minds are absorbed
into a jelly of impulse and emotion.”</p>
<p class="c006">“I like your phrase about jelly,” said Vallance.
“It has an odd picturesqueness. Your
argument itself—or, rather, your assertion—strikes
me as a bit sweeping.”</p>
<p class="c006">“All the same,” Markham nodded, “it’s
worth thinking over.... Man in the mass,
as a crowd, can only feel; there is no such
thing as a mass-mind or intellect—only mass
desires and emotions. That is what I mean by
saying that Meyer—whatever his intelligence
or sanity—is the instrument of instinctive
emotion.... And instinctive emotion, Holt—until
it has been hurt—is damnably and
owlishly courageous. It isn’t clever enough to
be afraid; not even of red murder—or starvation
by the million—or the latest thing in gas
or high explosive. Stir it up enough and it’ll
run on ’em—as the lemmings run to the sea.”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_30">30</span>Holt snorted something that sounded like
“Rot!” and Vallance, sprawling an arm along
the mantelpiece, asked, “Another of your
numerous theories?”</p>
<p class="c006">“If you like,” Markham assented, “but it’s
a theory deduced from hard facts.... It’s a
fact, isn’t it, that no politician takes a crowd
into his confidence until he wants to make a
fight of it? It’s a fact, isn’t it, that no movements
in mass are creative or constructive—that
simultaneous action, simultaneous
thought, always is and must be destructive?
Set what we call the People in motion and something
has got to be broken. The crowd-life is
still at the elementary, the animal stage; it
has not yet acquired the human power of
construction ... and the crowd, the people,
democracy—whatever you like to call it—has
been stirring in the last few years; getting
conscious again, getting active, looking round
for something to break ... which means that
the politician is faced once more with the
necessity of giving it something to break.
Naturally he prefers that the breakage should
take place in the distance—and, League or no
League, the eternal and obvious resource is
War ... which was not too risky when
fought with swords and muskets, but now—as
<span class="pageno" id="Page_31">31</span>Holt says—is impossible. Being a bit of a
chemist, I’m sure Holt is right; but I’m also
sure that man, as a herd, does not think.
Further, I am doubtful if man, as a herd, ever
finds out what is impossible except through
the painful process of breaking his head against
it.”</p>
<p class="c006">“I’m a child in politics,” said Vallance,
“and I may be dense—but I’m afraid it isn’t
entirely clear to me whether your views are
advanced or grossly and shamelessly reactionary?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Neither,” said Markham, “or both—you
can take your choice. I have every sympathy
with the people, the multitude; it’s hard lines
that it can only achieve destruction—just because
there is so much of it, because it isn’t
smaller. But I also sympathize with the
politician in his efforts to control the destructive
impulse of the multitude. And, finally—in
view of that progress of science of which
Holt has reminded us, and of which I know a
little myself—I’m exceedingly sorry for us
all.”</p>
<p class="c006">Someone from across the room asked:
“You make it war, then?”</p>
<p class="c006">“I make it war. We have had peace for
more than a generation, so our periodic blood-letting
<span class="pageno" id="Page_32">32</span>is already a long time overdue. The
League has staved it off for a bit, but it hasn’t
changed the human constitution; and the
real factor in the Karthanian quarrel—or any
other—is the periodic need of the human herd
for something to break and for something to
break itself against.... Resistance and self-sacrifice—the
need of them—the call of the
lemming to the sea.... And, perhaps, it’s all
the stronger in this generation because this
generation has never known war, and does not
fear it.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Education,” said Holt, addressing the air,
“is general and compulsory—has been so for
a good many years. The inference being that
the records of previous wars—and incidentally
of the devastation involved—are not inaccessible
to that large proportion of our population
which is known as the average man.”</p>
<p class="c006">“As printed pages, yes,” Markham agreed.
“But what proportion even of a literate
population is able to accept the statement of
a printed page as if it were a personal experience?”</p>
<p class="c006">“As we’re not all fools,” Holt retorted, “I
don’t make it war.”</p>
<p class="c006">“I hope you’re right, for my own sake,”
said Markham good-temperedly. He knocked
<span class="pageno" id="Page_33">33</span>out his pipe as he spoke and made ready to
go—while Theodore looked after him, interested,
for the moment, disturbingly....
Markham’s unemotional and matter-of-fact
acceptance of “periodic blood-letting” made
rumour suddenly real, and for the first time
Theodore saw the Karthanian imbroglio as
more than the substance of telegrams and
articles, something human, actual, and alive....
Saw himself, even Phillida, concerned
in it—through a medley of confused and
threatening shadows.... For the moment
he was roused from his self-absorption and
thrust into the world that he shared with the
common herd of men. He and Phillida were
no longer as the gods apart, with their lives to
make in Eden; they were little human beings,
the sport of a common human destiny....
He remembered how eagerly he caught at
Holt’s condemnation of Markham as a crank
and Vallance’s next comment on the crisis.</p>
<p class="c006">“We had exactly the same scare three—or
was it four?—years ago. This is the
trouble about Transylvania all over again—just
the same alarums and excursions. That
fizzled out quietly in a month or six weeks
and the chances are that Karthania will
fizzle out, too.”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_34">34</span>“Of course it will,” Holt declared with
emphasis—and proceeded to demolish Markham’s
theories. Theodore left before he had
finished his argument; as explained dogmatically
in Holt’s penetrating voice, the intrigues
and dissensions of the Federal Council were
once more unreal and frankly boring. The
argument satisfied, but no longer interested—and
ten minutes after Markham’s departure his
thoughts had drifted away from politics to the
private world he shared with Phillida Rathbone.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">For very delight of it he lingered over his
courtship, finding charm in the pretence of
uncertainty long after it had ceased to exist.
To Phillida also there was pleasure not only
in the winning, but in the exquisite game itself;
once or twice when Theodore was hovering
near avowal, she deferred the inevitable,
eluded him with laughter, asked tacitly to
play a little longer.... In the end the
avowal came suddenly, on the flash and impulse
of a moment—when Phillida hesitated
over one of his gifts, a print she had admired
on the wall of his sitting-room, duly brought
the next day for her acceptance.</p>
<p class="c006">“No, I oughtn’t to take it—it’s one of your
treasures,” she remonstrated.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_35">35</span>“If you’d take all I have—and me with it,”
he stammered.... That was the crisis of the
exquisite game—and pretence of uncertainty
was over.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_36">36</span>
<h2 class="c004">III</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">One impression of those first golden hours
that stayed with him always was the certainty
with which they had dwelt on the details of
their common future; he could see Phillida
with her hands on his shoulders explaining
earnestly that they must live very near to the
Dad—the dear old boy had no one but herself
and they mustn’t let him miss her too much.
And when Theodore asked, “You don’t think
he’ll object to me?” Rathbone’s disapproval
was the only possible cloud—which lifted at
Phillida’s amused assurance that the old dear
wasn’t as blind as all that and, having objections,
would have voiced them before it was
too late.</p>
<p class="c006">“You don’t suppose he hasn’t noticed—just
because he hasn’t said anything!”...
Whereupon Theodore caught at her hands and
demanded how long she had noticed?—and
they fell to a happy retracing of this step and
that in their courtship.</p>
<p class="c006">When they heard Rathbone enter she ran
<span class="pageno" id="Page_37">37</span>down alone, telling Theodore to stay where he
was till she called him; returning in five
minutes or so, half-tearful and half-smiling, to
say the dear old thing was waiting in the library.
Then Theodore, in his turn, went down
to the library where, red to the ears and stammering
platitudes, he shook hands with his
future father-in-law—proceeding eventually
to details of his financial position and the hope
that Rathbone would not insist upon too lengthy
an engagement?... The answer was so
slow in coming that he repeated his question
nervously.</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” said Rathbone at last, “I don’t
know that I”—(he laid stress on the pronoun)—“I
don’t know that I should insist upon a
very lengthy engagement. Only....”</p>
<p class="c006">Again he paused so long that Theodore
repeated “Only?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Only—there may be obstacles—not of
my making or Phillida’s. Connected with the
office—your work ... I dare say you’ve
been too busy with your own affairs to give
very much attention to the affairs of the
world in general; still I conclude the papers
haven’t allowed you to forget that the
Federal Council was to vote to-day on the
resolution to take punitive action? Result
<span class="pageno" id="Page_38">38</span>is just through—half an hour ago. Resolution
carried, by a majority of one only.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Was it?” said Theodore—and remembered
a vague impulse of resentment, a difficulty in
bringing down his thoughts from Phillida to
the earthiness of politics. It took him an
effort and a moment to add: “Close thing—but
they’ve pulled it off.”</p>
<p class="c006">“They have,” said Rathbone. “Just pulled
it off—but it remains to be seen if that’s
matter for congratulation.... The vote commits
us to action—definitely—and the minority
have entered a protest against punitive
action.... It seems unlikely that the protest
is only formal.”</p>
<p class="c006">He was dry and curiously deliberate—leaning
back in his chair, speaking quietly,
with fingers pressed together.... To the
end Theodore remembered him like that; a
square-jawed man, leaning back in his chair,
speaking slowly, unemotionally—the harbinger
of infinite misfortune.... And himself,
the listener, a young man engrossed by his
own new happiness; irritated, at first, by the
intrusion of that which did not concern it;
then (as once before in Vallance’s rooms)
uneasy and conscious of a threat.</p>
<p class="c006">He heard himself asking, “You think it’s—serious?”
<span class="pageno" id="Page_39">39</span>and saw Rathbone’s mouth twist
into the odd semblance of a smile.</p>
<p class="c006">“I think so. One way or other we shall
know within a week.”</p>
<p class="c006">“You can’t mean—war?” Theodore asked
again—remembering Holt and his “Impossible!”</p>
<p class="c006">“It doesn’t seem unlikely,” said Rathbone.</p>
<p class="c006">He had risen, with his hands thrust deep
into his pockets, and begun to pace backwards
and forwards. “Something may happen at
the last minute—but it’s difficult to see how
they can draw back. They have gone too far.
They’re committed, just as we are—committed
to a principle.... If we yield the Council
abdicates its authority once for all; it’s an
end of the League—a plain break, and the
Lord knows what next. And the other side
daren’t stop at verbal protest. They will
have to push their challenge; there’s too
much clamour behind them....”</p>
<p class="c006">“There was Transylvania,” Theodore reminded
him.</p>
<p class="c006">“I know—and nothing came of it. But
that wasn’t pushed quite so far.... They
threatened, but never definitely—they left
themselves a possibility of retreat. Now ...
as I said, something may happen ... and,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_40">40</span>meanwhile, to go back to what I meant about
you, personally, how this might affect you....”</p>
<p class="c006">He dropped into swift explanation. “Considerable
rearrangement in the work of the
Department—if it should be necessary to place
it on a war-footing.” Theodore’s duties—if
the worst should happen—would certainly
take him out of London and therefore part
him from Phillida. “I can tell you that
definitely—now.”</p>
<p class="c006">Perhaps he realized that the announcement,
on a day of betrothal, was brutal; for he
checked himself suddenly in his walk to and
fro, clapped the young man good-naturedly
on the shoulder, repeated that “Something
might happen” and supposed he would not be
sorry to hear that a member of the Government
required his presence—“So you and
Phillida can dine without superfluous parents.”...
And he said no word of war or parting to
Phillida—who came down with Theodore to
watch her father off, standing arm-in-arm
upon the doorstep in the pride of her new relationship.</p>
<p class="c006">The threat lightened as they dined alone
deliciously, as a foretaste of housekeeping in
common; Phillida left him no thoughts to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_41">41</span>stray and only once, while the evening lasted,
did they look from their private Paradise upon
the world of common humanity. Phillida,
as the clock neared ten, wondered vaguely
what Henderson had wanted with her father?
Was there anything particular, did Theodore
know, any news about the Federal Council?...
He hesitated for a moment, then told
her the bare facts only—the vote and the
minority protest.</p>
<p class="c006">“A protest,” she repeated. “That’s what
they’ve all been afraid of.... It looks bad,
doesn’t it?”</p>
<p class="c006">He agreed it looked bad; thinking less, it
may be, of the threat of red ruin and disaster
than of Rathbone’s warning that his duties
would part him from Phillida.</p>
<p class="c006">“I hope it doesn’t mean war,” she said.</p>
<p class="c006">At the time her voice struck him as serious,
even anxious; later it amazed him that she
had spoken so quietly, that there was no
trembling of the slim white fingers that played
with her chain of heavy beads.</p>
<p class="c006">“Do you think it does?” she asked him.</p>
<p class="c006">Because he remembered the threat of parting
and had need of her daily presence, he was
stubborn in declaring that it did not, and could
not, mean war; quoting Holt that modern
<span class="pageno" id="Page_42">42</span>war was impossible, that statesmen and
soldiers knew it, and insisting that this was
the Transylvanian business over again and
would be settled as that was settled. She
shook her head thoughtfully, having heard
other views from her father; but her voice
(he knew later) was thoughtful only—not a
quiver, not a hint of real fear in it.</p>
<p class="c006">“It’ll have to come sometime—now or in a
year or two. At least, that’s what everybody
says. I wonder if it’s true.”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” he said, “it isn’t—unless we make it
true. This sort of thing—it’s a kind of common
nightmare we have now and then. Every
few years—and when it’s over we turn round
and wake up and wonder what the devil we
were frightened about.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” she agreed, “when you come to
think of it, it is rather like that. I don’t
remember in the least what the fuss was all
about last time—but I know the papers were
full of Transylvania and the poor old Dad was
worked off his head for a week or two....
And then it was over and we forgot all about
it.”</p>
<p class="c006">And at that they turned and went back to
their golden solitude, shutting out, for the rest
of the evening, a world that made protests and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_43">43</span>sent ominous telegrams. Before Theodore
left her, to walk home restless with delight,
they had decided on the fashion of Phillida’s
ring and planned the acquisition of a Georgian
house—with powder-closet.</p>
<p class="c006">It was his restless delight that made sleep
impossible—and he sat at his window and
smoked till the east was red.... While
Henderson and Rathbone, a mile or two away,
planned Distribution on a war-footing.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Events in the next few days moved rapidly
in an atmosphere of tense and rising life;
races and peoples were suddenly and acutely
conscious of their life collective, and the
neighbourly quarrel and bitterness of yesterday
was forgotten in the new comradeship
born of common hatred and common passion
for self-sacrifice. There was talk at first, with
diplomatists and leader-writers, of a possibility
of localizing the conflict; but within
forty-eight hours of the issue of the minority
protest it was clear that the League would be
rent. On one side, as on the other, statesmen
were popular only when known to be unyielding
in the face of impossible demands; crowds
gathered when ministers met to take counsel
and greeted them with cries to stand fast.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_44">44</span>Behind vulgar effervescence and music-hall
thunder was faith in a righteous cause; and,
as ever, man believed in himself and his cause
with a hand on the hilt of his sword. Freedom
and justice were suddenly real and attainable
swiftly—through violence wrought
on their enemies.... Humanity, once more,
was inspired by ideals that justified the shedding
of blood and looked death in the face
without fear.</p>
<p class="c006">As always, there were currents and crosscurrents,
and those who were not seized by the
common, splendid passion denounced it. Some
meanly, by distortion of motive—crying down
faith as cupidity and the impulse to self-sacrifice
as arrogance; and others, more
worthy of hearing, who realized that the
impulse to self-sacrifice is passing and the
idealism of to-day the bestial cunning of
to-morrow.... On one side and the other
there was an attempt on the part of those who
foresaw something, at least, of the inevitable,
to pit fear against the impulse to self-sacrifice
and make clear to a people to whom war
was a legend only the extent of disaster ahead.
The attempt was defeated, almost as begun,
by the sudden launching of an ultimatum
with twenty-four hours for reply.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_45">45</span>At the news young men surged to the recruiting-stations,
awaiting their turn for admission
in long shouting, jesting lines; the
best blood and honour of a generation that
had not yet sated its inborn lust of combat.
Women stood to watch them as their ranks
moved slowly to the goal—some proud to
tears, others giggling a foolish approval.
Great shifting crowds—men and women who
could not rest—gathered in public places and
awaited the inevitable news. In the last few
hours—all protest being useless—even the
loudest of the voices that clamoured against
war had died down; and in the life collective
was the strange, sudden peace which comes
with the cessation of internal feud and the
focusing of hatred on those who dwell beyond
a nation’s borders.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Theodore Savage, in the days that followed
his betrothal, was kept with his nose to the
Distributive grindstone, working long hours
of overtime in an atmosphere transformed out
of knowledge. The languid and formal routine
of departments was succeeded by a fever
of hurried innovation; gone were the lazy,
semi-occupied hours when he had been wont to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_46">46</span>play with his thoughts of Phillida and the long
free evenings that were hers as a matter of
course. In the beginning he felt himself
curiously removed from the strong, heady
atmosphere that affected others like wine.
Absorption in Phillida counted for something
in his aloofness, but even without it his temperament
was essentially averse from the
crowd-life; he was stirred by the common
desire to be of service, but was conscious of no
mounting of energy restless and unsatisfied....
Having little conviction or bias in politics,
he accepted without question the general
version of the origins of conflict and resented,
in orthodox fashion, the gross breach of faith
and agreement which betrayed long established
design. “It had got to be” and
“They’ve been getting ready for years” were
phrases on the general lip which he saw no
reason to discredit; and, with acceptance of
the inevitability of conflict, he ceased to find
conflict “unthinkable.” In daily intercourse
with those to whom it was thinkable, practical,
a certainty—to some, in the end, a desirable
certainty—Holt’s phrase lost its meaning and
became a symbolic extravagance.... So far
he was caught in the swirl of the crowd-life;
but he was never one with it and remained
<span class="pageno" id="Page_47">47</span>conscious of it always as something that
flowed by him, something apart from himself.</p>
<p class="c006">Above all he knew it as something apart
when he saw how it had seized and mastered
Phillida. She was curiously alive to its sweep
and emotion, and beneath her outward daintiness
lay the power of fervid partisanship.
“If it weren’t for you,” she told him once, “I
should break my heart because I’m only a
woman”; and he saw that she pitied him,
that she was even resentful for his sake, when
she learned from her father that there was no
question of allowing the clerks of the Distribution
Office to volunteer for military service.</p>
<p class="c006">“He says the Department will need all its
trained men and that modern war is won by
organization even more than by fighting. I’m
glad you won’t have to go, my dear—I’m
glad—” and, saying it, she clung to him as to
one who stood in need of consolation.</p>
<p class="c006">He felt the implied consolation and sympathy—with
a twinge of conscience, not
entirely sure of deserving it. But for the
rigid departmental order, he knew he should
have thought it his duty to volunteer and take
his share of the danger that others were
clamouring to face; but he had not cursed
vehemently, like his junior, Cassidy, when
<span class="pageno" id="Page_48">48</span>Holles, equally blasphemous, burst into the
room with the news that enlistment was
barred. He thought of Cassidy’s angry blue
eyes as he swore that, by hook or by crook, he
would find his way into the air-service....
Phillida would have sympathized with Cassidy
and the flash of her eyes answered his; she
too, for the moment, was one with the crowd-life,
and there were moments when he felt it
was sweeping her away from his hold.</p>
<p class="c006">He felt it most on their last evening, on the
night the ultimatum expired; when he came
from the office, after hours of overtime, uncertain
whether he should find her, wondering
whether her excited restlessness had driven
her out into the crowds that surged round
Whitehall. As he ran up the stairs the sound
of a piano drifted from the room above; no
definite melody but a vague, irregular striking
of chords that came to an end as he entered the
room and Phillida looked up, expectant.</p>
<p class="c006">“At last,” she said as she ran to him.
“You don’t know how I have wanted you.
I can’t be alone—if you hadn’t turned up I
should have had to find someone to talk to.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Anyone—didn’t matter who?” he suggested.</p>
<p class="c006">She laughed, caught his hand and rubbed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_49">49</span>her cheek against it. “Yes, anyone—you
know what I mean. It’s just—when you
think of what’s happening, how can you keep
still?... As for father, I never see him
nowadays. I suppose there isn’t any news?”</p>
<p class="c006">“There can’t be,” he answered. “Not till
twelve.”</p>
<p class="c006">“No—and even at twelve it won’t really be
news. Just no answer—and the time will be
up.... We’re at peace now—till midnight....
What’s the time?”</p>
<p class="c006">He longed to be alone with her—alone with
her in thought as well as in outward seeming—but
her talk slipped restlessly away from his
leading and she moved uncertainly about the
room, returning at last to her vague striking
of the piano—sharp, isolated notes, and then
suddenly a masterful chord.</p>
<p class="c006">“Play to me,” he asked, “play properly.”</p>
<p class="c006">She shook her head and declared it was impossible.</p>
<p class="c006">“Anything connected is beyond me; I can
only strum and make noises.” She crashed in
the bass, rushed a swift arpeggio to the
treble, then turned to him, her eyes wide and
glowing. “If you hold your breath, can’t
you feel them all waiting?—thousands on
thousands—all through the world?...
<span class="pageno" id="Page_50">50</span>Waiting till midnight ... can’t you feel
it?”</p>
<p class="c006">“You make me feel it,” he answered.
“Tell me—you want war?”</p>
<p class="c006">The last words came out involuntarily, and
it was only the startled, sudden change in her
face that brought home to him what he had said.</p>
<p class="c006">“I want war,” she echoed.... “I want
men to be killed.... Theodore, what makes
you say that?”</p>
<p class="c006">He fumbled for words, not sure of his own
meaning—sure only that her eyes would
change and lose their fervour if, at the last
moment and by God-sent miracle, the sword
were returned to its sheath.</p>
<p class="c006">“Not that, of course—not the actual fighting.
I didn’t mean that.... But isn’t there
something in you—in you and in everyone—that’s
too strong to be arrested? Too swift?...
If nothing happened—if we drew back—you
couldn’t be still now; you couldn’t endure
it....”</p>
<p class="c006">She looked at him thoughtfully, puzzled,
half-assenting; then protested again: “I
don’t want it—but we can’t be still and endure
evil.”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” he said, “we can’t—but isn’t there
a gladness in the thought that we can’t?”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_51">51</span>“Because we’re right,” she flashed. “It’s
not selfish—you know it isn’t selfish. We see
what is right and, whatever it costs us, we
stand for it. The greatest gladness of all is
the gladness of giving—everything, even life....
That’s what makes me wish I were a
man!”</p>
<p class="c006">“The passion for self-sacrifice,” he said,
quoting Markham. “I was told the other day
it was one of the causes of war.... Don’t
look at me so reproachfully—I’m not a
pacifist. Give me a kiss and believe me.”</p>
<p class="c006">She laughed and gave him the kiss he asked
for, and for a minute or two he drew her out
of the crowd-life and they were alone together
as they had been on the night of their betrothal.
Then the spirit of restlessness took
hold of her again and she rose suddenly,
declaring they must find out what was happening—they
must go out and see for themselves.</p>
<p class="c006">“It’s only just past ten,” he argued.
“What can be happening for another two
hours? There’ll only be a crowd—walking up
and down and waiting.”</p>
<p class="c006">It was just the crowd and its going to and
fro that she needed, and she set to work to
coax him out of his reluctance. There would
<span class="pageno" id="Page_52">52</span>never be another night like this one—they
must see it together and remember it as long
as they lived.... Perhaps, her point gained,
she was remorseful, for she rewarded his assent
with a caress and a coaxing apology.</p>
<p class="c006">“We shall have so many evenings to ourselves,”
she told him—“and to-night—to-night
we don’t only belong to ourselves.”</p>
<p class="c006">He could feel her arm tremble and thrill on
his own as they came in sight of the Clock
Tower and the swarm of expectant humanity
that moved and murmured round Westminster.
On him the first impression was of
seething insignificance that the Clock Tower
dwarfed and the dignity of night reproved;
on her, as he knew by the trembling of her
fingers, a quickening of life and sensation....</p>
<p class="c006">They were still at the shifting edges of the
crowd when a man’s voice called “Phillida!”
and one of her undergraduate cousins linked
himself on to their company. For nearly an
hour the three moved backwards and forwards—through
the hum and mutter of voices, the
ceaseless turning of eyes to Big Ben and the
shuffling of innumerable feet.... When the
quarters chimed, there was always a hush;
when eleven throbbed solemnly, no man
stirred till the last beat died.... With
<span class="pageno" id="Page_53">53</span>silence and arrested movement the massed
humanity at the base of the Clock Tower was
no longer a seething insignificance; without
speech, without motion, it was suddenly dignified—life
faced with its destiny and intent
upon a Moving Finger....</p>
<p class="c006">“Only one more hour,” whispered Phillida
as the silence broke; and the Rathbone boy,
to show he was not moved, wondered if it was
worth their while to stay pottering about for
an hour?... No one answered his question,
since it needed no answer; and, the dignity
of silence over, they drifted again with the
crowd.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_54">54</span>
<h2 class="c004">IV</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">The Moving Finger had written off another
five minutes or so when police were suddenly
active and sections of the crowd lunged uncomfortably;
way was being made for the
passing of an official car—and in the backward
swirl of packed humanity Theodore was thrust
one way, Phillida and the Rathbone boy
another. For a moment he saw them as they
looked round and beckoned him; the next,
the swirl had carried him yet further—and
when it receded they were lost amongst the
drifting, shifting thousands. After ten minutes
more of pushing to and fro in search of
them, Theodore gave up the chase as fruitless
and made his way disconsolately to the Westminster
edge of the crowd.... Phillida, if
he knew her, would stay till the stroke of
midnight, later if the spirit moved her; and
she had an escort in the Rathbone boy, who,
in due time, would see her home.... There
was no need to worry—but he cursed the luck
of what might be their last evening.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_55">55</span>For a time he lingered uncertainly on the
edge of the pushing, shuffling mass; perhaps
would have lingered till the hour struck, if
there had not drifted to his memory the evening
at Vallance’s when Holt had declared this
night to be impossible—and when Markham
had “made it war.” And, with that, he
remembered also that Markham had rooms
near by—in one of the turnings off Great Smith
Street.</p>
<p class="c006">There was a light in the room that he knew
for Markham’s and it was only after he had
rung that he wondered what had urged him to
come. He was still wondering when the door
opened and could think of no better explanation
than “I saw you were up—by your light.”</p>
<p class="c006">“If you’d passed five minutes ago,” said
Markham, as he led the way upstairs, “you
wouldn’t have seen any light. I’m only just
back from the lab—and dining off biscuits and
whisky.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Is this making any difference to you,
then?” Theodore asked. “I mean, in the
way of work?”</p>
<p class="c006">Markham nodded as he poured out his
visitor’s whisky. “Yes, I’m serving the
country—the military people have taken me
over, lock and stock: with everyone else,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_56">56</span>apparently, who has ever done chemical
research. I’ve been pretty hard at it the last
few days, ever since the scare was serious....
And you—are you soldiering?”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” said Theodore and told him of the
departmental prohibition.</p>
<p class="c006">“It mayn’t make much difference in the
end,” said Markham.... “You see, I was
right—the other evening.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” Theodore answered, “I believe that
was why I came in. The crowd to-night
reminded me of what you said at Vallance’s—though
I don’t think I believed you then....
How long is it going to last?”</p>
<p class="c006">“God knows,” said Markham, with his
mouth full of biscuit. “We shall have had
enough of it—both sides—before very long;
but it’s one thing to march into hell with your
head up and another to find a way out....
There’s only one thing I’m fairly certain about—I
ought to have been strangled at birth.”</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore stared at him, not sure he had
caught the last words.</p>
<p class="c006">“You ought to——?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes—you heard me right. If the human
animal must fight—and nothing seems to stop
it—it should kill off its scientific men. Stamp
out the race of ’em, forbid it to exist....
<span class="pageno" id="Page_57">57</span>Holt was also right that evening, fundamentally.
You can’t combine the practice of
science and the art of war; in the end, it’s one
or the other. We, I think, are going to prove
that—very definitely.”</p>
<p class="c006">“And when you’ve proved it—we stop
fighting?”</p>
<p class="c006">Markham shrugged his shoulders, thrust
aside his plate and filled his pipe.</p>
<p class="c006">“Curious, the failure to understand the
influence on ourselves of what we make and
use. We just make and use and damn the
consequence.... When Lavoisier invented
the chemical balance, did he stop to consider
the possibilities of chemical action in combination
with outbursts of human emotion? If he
had...!”</p>
<p class="c006">In the silence that followed they heard the
chiming of three-quarters—and there flashed
inconsequently into Theodore’s memory, a
vision of himself, a small boy with his hand in
his mother’s, staring up, round-eyed, at Big
Ben of London—while his mother taught him
the words that were fitted to the chime.</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c008">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">Lord—through—this—hour</div>
<div class="line">Be—Thou—our—guide,</div>
<div class="line">So—by—Thy—power</div>
<div class="line">No—foot—shall—slide.</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c009"><span class="pageno" id="Page_58">58</span>... That, or something like that.... Odd,
that he should remember them now—when
for years he had not remembered.... “Lord—through—this—hour——”</p>
<p class="c006">He realized suddenly that Markham was
speaking—in jerks, between pulls at his pipe.
“... And the same with mechanics—not the
engine but the engine plus humanity. Take
young James Watt and his interest in the lid
of a tea-kettle! In France, by the way, they
tell the same story of Papin; but, so far as the
rest of us are concerned it doesn’t much matter
who first watched the lid of a kettle with
intelligence—the point is that somebody
watched it and saw certain of its latent possibilities.
Only its more immediate possibilities—and
we may take it for granted that
amongst those which he did not foresee were
the most important. The industrial system—the
drawing of men into crowds where they
might feed the machine and be fed by it—the
shrinkage of the world through the use of
mechanical transport. That—the shrinkage—when
we first saw it coming, we took to
mean union of peoples and the clasping of
distant hands—forgetting that it also meant
the cutting of distant throats.... Yet it
might have struck us that we are all potential
<span class="pageno" id="Page_59">59</span>combatants—and the only known method of
preventing a fight is to keep the combatants
apart! These odd, simple facts that we all of
us know—and lose sight of ... the drawing
together of peoples has always meant the clashing
of their interests ... and so new hatreds.
Inevitably new hatreds.”</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore quoted: “‘All men hate each
other naturally’.... You believe that?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Of individuals, no—but of all communities,
yes. Is there any form of the life collective
that is capable of love for its fellow—for
another community? Is there any church
that will stand aside that another church may
be advantaged? ... You and I are civilized,
as man and man; but collectively we are part
of a life whose only standard and motive is
self-interest, its own advantage ... a beast-life,
morally. If you understand that, you
understand to-night ... Which demands from
us sacrifices, makes none itself.... That’s
as far as we have got in the mass.”</p>
<p class="c006">Through the half-open window came the
hum and murmur of the crowd that waited for
the hour.... Theodore stirred restlessly,
conscious of the unseen turning of countless
faces to the clock—and aware, through the
murmur, of the frenzied little beating of his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_60">60</span>watch.... He hesitated to look at it—and
when he drew it out and said “Five minutes
more,” his voice sounded oddly in his ears.</p>
<p class="c006">“Five minutes,” said Markham.... He
laughed suddenly and pushed the bottle across
the table. “Do you know where we are now—you
and I and all of us? On the crest of the
centuries. They’ve carried us a long roll
upwards and now here we are—on top! In
five more minutes—three hundred little seconds—we
shall hear the crest curl over....
Meanwhile, have a drink!”</p>
<p class="c006">He checked himself and held up a finger.
“Your watch is slow!”</p>
<p class="c006">The hum and murmur of the crowd had
ceased and through silence unbroken came the
prayer of the Westminster chime.</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c008">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">Lord—through—this—hour</div>
<div class="line">Be—Thou—our—guide,</div>
<div class="line">So—by—Thy—power</div>
<div class="line">No—foot—shall—slide.</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c006">There was no other sound for the twelve
booming strokes of the hour: it was only as
the last beat quivered into silence that there
broke the moving thunder of a multitude.</p>
<p class="c006">“Over!” said Markham. “Hear it crash?...
Well, here’s to the centuries—after all,
they did the best they knew for us!”</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_61">61</span>
<h2 class="c004">V</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">The war-footing arrangements of the Distribution
Office included a system of food control
involving local supervision; hence provincial
centres came suddenly into being, and
to one of these—at York—Theodore Savage
was dispatched at little more than an hour’s
notice on the morning after war was declared.
He telephoned Phillida and they met at King’s
Cross and had ten hurried minutes on the
platform; she was still eager and excited,
bubbling over with the impulse to action—was
hoping to start training for hospital work—had
been promised an opening—she would
tell him all about it when she wrote. Her excitement
took the bitterness out of the parting—perhaps,
in her need to give and serve, she
was even proud that the sacrifice of parting
was demanded of her.... The last he saw
of her was a smiling face and a cheery little
wave of the hand.</p>
<p class="c006">He made the journey to York with a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_62">62</span>carriageful of friendly and talkative folk who,
in normal days, would have been strangers to
him and to each other; as it was, they exchanged
newspapers and optimistic views and
grew suddenly near to each other in their
common interest and resentment.... That
was what war meant in those first stirring
days—friendliness, good comradeship, the
desire to give and serve, the thrill of unwonted
excitement.... Looking back from after
years it seemed to him that mankind, in those
days, was finer and more gracious than he had
ever known it—than he would ever know it
again.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">The first excitement over, he lived somewhat
tediously at York between his office and
dingily respectable lodgings; discovering very
swiftly that, so far as he, Theodore Savage,
was concerned, a state of hostilities meant the
reverse of alarums and excursions. For him
it was the strictest of official routine and the
multiplication of formalities. His hours of
liberty were fewer than in London, his duties
more tiresome, his chief less easy to get on
with; there was frequent overtime, and leave—which
meant Phillida—was not even a
distant possibility. For all his honest desire
<span class="pageno" id="Page_63">63</span>of service he was soon frankly bored by his
work; its atmosphere of minute regularity
and insistent detail was out of keeping with
the tremor and uncertainty of war, and there
was something æsthetically wrong about a
fussy process of docketing and checking while
nations were at death grips and the fate of a
world in the balance.... His one personal
satisfaction was the town, York itself—the
walls, the Bars, and above all the Minster;
he lodged near the Minster, could see it from
his window, and its enduring dignity was a
daily relief alike from the feverish perusal of
war news, his landlady’s colour-scheme and
taste in furniture and the fidgety trifling of
the office.</p>
<p class="c006">In the evening he read many newspapers
and wrote long letters to Phillida; who also,
he gathered, had discovered that war might
be tedious. “We haven’t any patients yet,”
she scribbled him in one of her later letters,
“but, of course, I’m learning all sorts of things
that will be useful later on, when we do get
them. Bandaging and making beds—and then
we attend lectures. It’s rather dull waiting
and bandaging each other for practice—but
naturally I’m thankful that there aren’t
enough casualties to go round. Up to now the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_64">64</span>regular hospitals have taken all that there are—‘temporaries’
like us don’t get even a look
in.... The news is really splendid, isn’t
it?”</p>
<p class="c006">There were few casualties in the beginning
because curiously little happened; Western
Europe was removed from the actual storm-centre,
and in England, after the first few days
of alarmist rumours concerning invasion by
air and sea, the war, for a time, settled down
into a certain amount of precautionary rationing
and a daily excitement in newspaper form—so
much so that the timorous well-to-do,
who had retired from London on the outbreak
of hostilities, trickled back in increasing numbers.
Hostilities, in the beginning, were local
and comparatively ineffective; one of the
results of the limitation of troops and armaments
enforced by the constitution of the
League was to give to the opening moves of
the contest a character unprepared and
amateurish. The aim, on either side, was to
obtain time for effective preparation, to
organize forces and resources; to train
fighters and mobilize chemists, to convert
factories, manufacture explosive and gas, and
institute a system of co-operation between the
strategy of far-flung allies. Hence, in the beginning,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_65">65</span>the conflict was partial and, as regards
its strategy, hesitating; there were
spasms of bloody incident which were deadly
enough in themselves, but neither side cared
to engage itself seriously before it had attained
its full strength.... First blood was shed in
a fashion that was frankly mediæval; the
heady little democracy whose failure to establish
a claim in the Court of Arbitration had
been the immediate cause of the conflict, flung
itself with all its half-civilized resources upon
its neighbour and enemy, the victorious party
to the suit. Between the two little communities
was a treasured feud which had burst out
periodically in defiance of courts and councils;
and, control once removed, the border tribesmen
gathered for the fray with all the enthusiasm
of their rude forefathers, and raided each
other’s territory in bands armed with knives
and revolvers. Their doings made spirited
reading in the press in the early days of the
war—before the generality of newspaper readers
had even begun to realize that battles
were no longer won by the shock of troops and
that the root-principle of modern warfare was
the use of the enemy civilian population as an
auxiliary destructive force.</p>
<p class="c006">Certain states and races grasped the principle
<span class="pageno" id="Page_66">66</span>sooner than others, being marked out for
early enlightenment by the accident of geographical
position. In those not immediately
affected, such as Britain, censorship on either
side ruled out, as impossible for publication,
the extent of the damage inflicted on allies,
and the fact that it was not only in enemy
countries that large masses of population,
hunted out of cities by chemical warfare and
the terror from above, had become nomadic
and predatory. That, as the struggle grew
fiercer, became, inevitably, the declared aim
of the strategist; the exhaustion of the
enemy by burdening him with a starving and
nomadic population. War, once a matter of
armies in the field, had resolved itself into an
open and thorough-going effort to ruin enemy
industry by setting his people on the run; to
destroy enemy agriculture not only by incendiary
devices—the so-called poison-fire—but
by the secondary and even more potent
agency of starving millions driven out to
forage as they could.... The process, in
the stilted phrase of the communiqué, was
described as “displacement of population”;
and displacement of population, not victory
in the field, became the real military
objective.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_67">67</span>To the soldier, at least, it was evident very
early in the struggle that the perfection of
scientific destruction had entailed, of necessity,
the indirect system of strategy associated with
industrial warfare; displacement of population
being no more than a natural development
of the striker’s method of attacking a government
by starving the non-combatant community.
The aim of the scientific soldier, like
that of the soldier of the past, was to cut his
enemy’s communications, to intercept and
hamper his supplies; and the obvious way to
attain that end was by ruthless disorganization
of industrial centres, by letting loose a famished
industrial population to trample and
devour his crops. Manufacturing districts, on
either side, were rendered impossible to work
in by making them impossible to live in; and
from one crowded centre after another there
streamed out squalid and panic-stricken herds,
devouring the country as they fled. Seeking
food, seeking refuge, turning this way or that;
pursued by the terror overhead or imagining
themselves pursued; and breaking, striving to
separate, to make themselves small and invisible....
And, as air-fleets increased in
strength and tactics were perfected—as one
centre of industry after another went down
<span class="pageno" id="Page_68">68</span>and out—the process of disintegration was
rapid. To the tentative and hesitating opening
of the war had succeeded a fury of widespread
destruction; and statesmen, rendered
desperate by the sudden crumbling of their
own people—the sudden lapse into primitive
conditions—could hope for salvation only
through a quicker process of “displacement”
on the enemy side.</p>
<p class="c006">There were reasons, political and military,
why the average British civilian, during the
opening phases of the struggle, knew little of
warfare beyond certain food restrictions, the
news vouchsafed in the communiqués and the
regulation comments thereon; the enemy
forces which might have brought home to him
the meaning of the term “displacement”
were occupied at first with other and nearer
antagonists. Hence continental Europe—and
not Europe alone—was spotted with ulcers of
spreading devastation before displacement
was practised in England. There had been
stirrings of uneasiness from time to time—of
uneasiness and almost of wonder that the
weapon she was using with deadly effect had
not been turned against herself; but at the
actual moment of invasion there was something
like public confidence in a speedy end to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_69">69</span>the struggle—and the principal public grievance
was the shortage and high price of
groceries.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Whatever he forgot and confused in after
days—and there were stretches of time that
remained with him only as a blur—Theodore
remembered very clearly every detail and
event of the night when disaster began.
Young Hewlett’s voice as he announced
disaster—and what he, Theodore, was doing
when the boy rapped on the window. Not
only what happened, but his mood when the
interruption came and the causes of it; he had
suffered an irritating day at the office, crossed
swords with a self-important chief and been
openly snubbed for his pains. As a result, his
landlady’s evening grumble on the difficulties
of war-time housekeeping seemed longer and
less bearable than usual, and he was still out of
tune with the world in general when he sat
down to write to Phillida. He remembered
phrases of the letter—never posted—wherein
he worked off his irritation. “I got into
trouble to-day through thinking of you when
I was supposed to be occupied with indents.
You are responsible, Blessed Girl, for several
most horrible muckers, affecting the service of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_70">70</span>the country.... Your empty hospital don’t
want you and my empty-headed boss don’t
want me—oh, lady mine, if I could only make
him happy by sacking myself and catching
the next train to London!” ... And so on
and so on....</p>
<p class="c006">It was late, nearing midnight, when he
finished his letter and, for want of other occupation,
turned back to a half-read evening
paper; the communiqués were meagre, but
there was a leading article pointing out the
inevitable effect of displacement on the enemy’s
resources and morale,<a id="t70"/> and he waded through its
comfortable optimism. As he laid aside the
paper he realized how sleepy he was and rose
yawning; he was on his way to the door, with
intent to turn in, when the rapping on the
window halted him. He pulled aside the
blind and saw a face against the glass—pressed
close, with a flattened white nose.</p>
<p class="c006">“Who’s that?” he asked, pushing up the
window. It was Hewlett, one of his juniors
at the office, out of breath with running and
excitement.</p>
<p class="c006">“I say, Savage, come along out. There’s
no end going on—fires, the whole sky’s red.
They’ve come over at last and no mistake.
Crashaw and I have been watching ’em and I
<span class="pageno" id="Page_71">71</span>thought you’d like to have a look. It’s worth
seeing—we’re just along there, on the wall.
Hurry up!”</p>
<p class="c006">The boy was dancing with eagerness to get
back and Theodore had to run to keep up with
him. He and Crashaw, Hewlett explained in
gasps, had spent the evening in a billiard-room;
it was on their way back to their
diggings that they had noticed sudden lights
in the sky—sort of flashes—and gone up on
the wall to see better.... No, it wasn’t only
searchlights—you could see them too—sudden
flashes and the sky all red. Fires—to the
south. It was the real thing, no doubt about
that—and the only wonder was why they
hadn’t come before.... At the head of the
steps leading up to the wall were three or four
figures with their heads all turned one way;
and as Hewlett, mounting first, called “Still
going on?” another voice called back,
“Rather!”</p>
<p class="c006">They stood on the broad, flat wall and
watched—in a chill little wind. The skyline
to the south and south-west was reddened with
a glow that flickered and wavered spasmodically
and, as Hewlett had said, there were
flashes—the bursting of explosive or star-shells.
Also there were moments when the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_72">72</span>reddened skyline throbbed suddenly in places,
grew vividly golden and sent out long fiery
streamers.... They guessed at direction and
wondered how far off; the wind was blowing
sharply from the north, towards the glow;
hence it carried sound away from them and it
was only now and then that they caught more
than a mutter and rumble.</p>
<p class="c006">As the minutes drew out the news spread
through the town and the watchers on the
wall increased in numbers; not only men but
women, roused from bed, who greeted the
flares with shrill, excited “Oh’s” and put
ceaseless questions to their men folk. Young
Hewlett, at Theodore’s elbow, gave himself
up to frank interest in his first sight of war;
justifying a cheerfulness that amounted to
enthusiasm by explaining at intervals that he
guessed our fellows were giving ’em what for
and by this time they were sorry they’d come....
Once a shawled woman demanded tartly
why they didn’t leave off, then, if they’d had
enough? Whereat Hewlett, unable to think
of an answer, pretended not to hear and moved
away.</p>
<p class="c006">Of his own sensations while he watched from
the wall Theodore remembered little save the
bodily sensation of chill; he saw himself
<span class="pageno" id="Page_73">73</span>standing with his back to the wind, his
shoulders hunched and the collar of his coat
turned up. The murmur of hushed voices
remained with him and odd snatches of fragmentary
talk; there was the woman who
persisted uneasily, “But you can’t ’ear ’em
coming with these ’ere silent engines—why,
they might be right over us naow!” And
the man who answered her gruffly with “You’d
jolly well know if they were!” ... And perpetual
conjecture as to distance and direction
of the glow; disputes between those who asserted
that over there was Leeds, and those
who scoffed contemptuously at the idea—arguing
that, if Leeds were the centre of
disturbance, the guns would have sounded
much nearer.... Petty talk, he remembered,
and plainly enough—but not how much
he feared or foresaw. He must have been
anxious, uneasy, or he would not have stood
for long hours in the chill of the wind; but his
definite impressions were only of scattered,
for the most part uneducated, talk, of silhouetted
figures that shifted and grouped, of
turning his eyes from the lurid skyline to the
shadowy rock that in daylight was the mass of
the cathedral.... In the end sheer craving
for warmth drove him in; leaving Hewlett
<span class="pageno" id="Page_74">74</span>and Crashaw deaf to his reminder that the
office expected them at nine.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">With the morning came news and—more
plentifully—rumour; also, the wind having
dropped, a persistent thunder from the
south. Industrial Yorkshire, it was clear, was
being subjected to that process of human displacement
which, so far, it had looked on as an
item in the daily communiqué; the attack,
moreover, was an attack in force, since the
invaders did not find it needful to desist with
the passing of darkness. Rumour, in the
absence of official intelligence, invented an
enveloping air-fleet which should cut them off
from their base; and meanwhile the thunder
continued....</p>
<p class="c006">This much, at least, was shortly official and
certain: nearly all rail, road and postal communication
to the south was cut off—trains
had ceased to run Londonwards and ordinary
traffic on the highways was held up at barriers
and turned back. Only military cars used
the roads—and returned to add their reports
to those brought in by air-scouts; but as a
rule the information they furnished was for
official enlightenment only, and it was not till
the refugees arrived in numbers that the full
<span class="pageno" id="Page_75">75</span>meaning of displacement was made clear to
the ordinary man.</p>
<p class="c006">It was after the second red night that the
refugees appeared in their thousands—a horde
of human rats driven out of their holes by
terror, by fire and by gas. Whatever their
status and possessions in the life of peace, they
came with few exceptions on foot; as roads,
like railways, were a target for the airman,
the highway was avoided for the by-path or
the open field, and the flight from every panic-stricken
centre could be traced by long wastes
of trampled crops. There were those who,
terrified beyond bearing by the crash of
masonry and long trembling underground,
saw safety only in the roofless open, refused
to enter houses and persisted in huddling in
fields—unafraid, as yet, of the so-called
poison-fire which had licked up the crops in
Holderness and the corn-growing district
round Pontefract.... Leeds, for a day or
two, was hardly touched; but with the outpouring
of fugitives from Dewsbury, Wakefield,
Halifax and Bradford, Leeds also began
to vomit her terrified multitudes. A wave of
vagrant destitution rushed suddenly and
blindly northward—anywhere away from the
ruin of explosive, the flames and death by
<span class="pageno" id="Page_76">76</span>suffocation; while authority strove vainly
to control and direct the torrent of overpowering
misery.</p>
<p class="c006">It was in the early morning that the torrent
reached York and rolled through it; overwhelming
the charity, private and public, that
at first made efforts to cope with the rush of
misery. Theodore’s room for a time was given
up to a man with bandaged eyes and puffed
face whom his wife had led blindfold from
Castleford. The man himself sat dumb and
suffering, breathing heavily through blistered
lips; the woman raged vulgarly against the
Government which had neglected to supply
them with gas-masks, to have the place properly
defended, to warn people! “The bloody
fools ought to have known what was coming
and if her man was blinded for the rest of his
life it was all the fault of this ’ere Government
that never troubled its blasted ’ead as long as
it drew its money.” ... That was in the
beginning, before the flood of misery had
swollen so high that even the kindliest shrank
from its squalid menace; and Theodore, because
it was the first he heard, remembered her
story when he had forgotten others more
piteous.</p>
<p class="c006">Before midday there was only one problem
<span class="pageno" id="Page_77">77</span>for local authority, civil and military—the
disposal of displaced population; that is to
say, the herding of vagrants that could not
all be sheltered, that could not all be fed, that
blackened fields, choked streets, drove onward
and sank from exhaustion. The railway line
to the north was still clear and, in obedience
to wireless instructions from London, trains
packed with refugees were sent off to the
north, with the aim of relieving the pressure
on local resources. Disorganization of transport
increased the difficulty of food supply
and even on the first day of panic and migration
the agricultural community were raising
a cry of alarm. Blind terror and hunger
between them wrought havoc; fields were
trampled and fugitives were plundering
already—would plunder more recklessly
to-morrow.</p>
<p class="c006">All day, all night, displaced humanity came
stumbling in panic from the south and south-west;
spreading news of the torment it had
fled from, the dead it had left and the worse
than dead who still crouched in an inferno
whence they could not summon courage to
fly. The railways could not deal with a tithe
of the number who clamoured to be carried to
the north, into safety; by the first evening
<span class="pageno" id="Page_78">78</span>the town was well-nigh eaten out, and householders,
hardening their hearts against misery,
were bolting themselves in, for fear of misery
grown desperate. While out in the country
farmers stabled their live-stock and kept
ceaseless watch against the hungry.</p>
<p class="c006">All day the approaches to the station were
besieged by those who hoped for a train; and,
on the second night of the invasion, Theodore,
sent by his chief with a message to the military
transport officer, fought his way through a
solid crowd on the platform—a crowd excluded
from a train that was packed and
struggling with humanity. A crowd that was
squalid, unreasoning and blindly selfish; intent
only on flight and safety—and some of it
brutally intent. There were scuffles with
porters and soldiers who refused to open locked
doors, angry hootings and wild swayings
backward and forward as the train moved out
of the station; Theodore’s efforts to make his
way to the station-master’s office were held
to be indicative of a desire to travel by the
next train and he was buffeted aside without
mercy. There was something in the brute
mass of terror that sickened him—a suggestion
already of the bestial, the instinctive, the
unhuman.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_79">79</span>The transport officer looked up at him with
tired, angry eyes and demanded what the hell
he wanted?... Whereat Theodore handed
him a typewritten note from a punctilious
chief and explained that they had tried to
get through on the telephone, either to him or
the station-master, but——</p>
<p class="c006">“I should rather think not,” said the transport
officer rudely. “We’ve both of us got
more important things to worry about than
little Distribution people. The telephone
clerk did bring me some idiotic message or
other, but I told him I didn’t want to hear it.”</p>
<p class="c006">He glanced at the typewritten note—then
glared at it—and went off into a cackle of
laughter; which finally tailed into blasphemy
coupled with obscene abuse.</p>
<p class="c006">“Seen this?” he asked when he had sworn
himself out. “Well, at any rate you know
what it’s about. The —— has sent for
particulars of to-morrow’s refugee train service—wants
to know the number and capacity
of trains to be dispatched to Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Wants to enter it in duplicate, I
suppose—and make lots and lots and lots of
carbon copies. God in Heaven!”—and
again he sputtered into blasphemy....
“Well, I needn’t bother to write down the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_80">80</span>answer; even if you’ve no more sense than he
has, you’ll be able to remember it all right.
It’s nil to both questions; nil trains to Newcastle,
nil capacity. So that’s that!...
What’s more—if it’s any satisfaction to your
darned-fool boss to know it—we haven’t been
sending any trains to Newcastle all day.”</p>
<p class="c006">“But I thought,” began Theodore—wondering
if the man were drunk? He was, more
than slightly—having fought for two days
with panic-stricken devils and helped himself
through with much whisky; but, drunk or
not, he was sure of his facts and rapped them
out with authority.</p>
<p class="c006">“Not to Newcastle. The first two or three
got as far as Darlington—this morning. There
they were pulled up. Then it was Northallerton—now
we send ’em off to Thirsk and leave
the people there to deal with ’em. You bet
they’ll send ’em further if they can—you don’t
suppose they want to be eaten out, any more
than we do. But, for all I know, they’re
getting ’em in from the other side.”</p>
<p class="c006">“The other side?” Theodore repeated.
“What do you mean?” Whereat the transport
officer, grown suddenly uncommunicative,
leaned back in his chair and whistled.</p>
<p class="c006">“That’s all I can tell you,” he vouchsafed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_81">81</span>at length. “Trains haven’t run beyond
Darlington since yesterday. I conclude H.Q.
knows the reason, but they haven’t imparted
it to me—I’ve only had my orders. It isn’t
our business if the trains get stopped so long
as we send ’em off—and we’re sending ’em and
asking no questions.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Do you mean,” Theodore stammered,
“that—this—is going on up north?”</p>
<p class="c006">“What do you think?” said the transport
officer. “It’s the usual trick, isn’t it?...
Start ’em running from two sides at once—don’t
let ’em settle, send ’em backwards and
forwards, keep ’em going!... We’ve played
it often enough on them—now we’re getting a
bit of our own back.... However, I’ve no
official information. You know just as much
as I do.”</p>
<p class="c006">“But,” Theodore persisted, “the people
coming through from the north. What do
they say—they must know?”</p>
<p class="c006">“There aren’t any people coming through,”
said the other grimly. “Military order since
this morning—no passenger traffic from the
north runs this side of Thirsk. We’ve got
enough of our own, haven’t we?... All I
say is—God help Thirsk and especially God
help the station-master!”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_82">82</span>He straightened himself suddenly and
grabbed at the papers on his table.</p>
<p class="c006">“Now, you’ve got what the damn fool sent
you for—and I’m trying to make out my
report.”</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">As Theodore fought his way out of the station
and the crowd that seethed round it, he
had an intolerable sense of being imprisoned
between two fires. If he could see far enough
to the north—to Durham and the Tyneside—there
would be another hot, throbbing horizon
and another stream of human destitution
pouring lamentably into the night.... And,
between the two fires, the two streams were
meeting—turning back upon themselves, intermingling ... in blind and agonized obedience
to the order to “keep ’em going!”...
What happened when a train was halted by
signal and the thronged misery inside it
learned that here, without forethought or
provision made, its flight must come to an
end? At Thirsk, Northallerton, by the wayside,
anywhere, in darkness?... A thin
sweep of rain was driving down the street, and
he fancied wretched voices calling through
darkness, through rain. Asking what, in
God’s name, was to become of them and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_83">83</span>where, in God’s name, they were to go?...
And the overworked officials who could give
no answer, seeking only to be rid of the
massed and dreadful helplessness that cumbered
the ground on which it trod!... Displacement
of population—the daily, stilted
phrase—had become to him a raw and livid
fact and he stood amazed at the limits of his
own imagination. Day after day he had read
the phrase, been familiar with it; yet, so far,
the horror had been words to him. Now the
daily, stilted phrase was translated, comprehensible:
“Don’t let ’em settle—keep ’em
going.”</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Back at the office, he discovered that his
errand to the station had been superfluous;
his chief, the man of precedent, order and many
carbon copies, was staring, haggard and bewildered,
at a typewritten document signed
by the military commandant.... And obtaining,
incidentally, his first glimpse into a
world till now unthinkable—where precedent
was not, where reference was useless and order
had ceased to exist.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_84">84</span>
<h2 class="c004">VI</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">That night ended Theodore’s life as a clerk
in the Civil Service. The confusion consequent
on the breakdown of transport had left
of the Distribution system but a paralysed
mockery, a name without functions attached
to it; and with morning Theodore and his
able-bodied fellows were impressed into a
special constabulary, hastily organized as a
weapon against vagrancy grown desperate
and riotous. They were armleted, put through
a hurried course of instruction, furnished with
revolvers or rifles and told to shoot plunderers
at sight.</p>
<p class="c006">No system of improvised rationing could
satisfy even the elementary needs of the
hundreds of thousands who swept hither and
thither, as panic seized or the invader drove
them; hence military authority, in self-preservation,
turned perforce on the growing
menace of fugitive and destitute humanity.
Order, so long as the semblance of it lasted,
strove to protect and maintain the supplies
<span class="pageno" id="Page_85">85</span>of the fighting forces; which entailed, inevitably,
the leaving to the fate of their own
devices of the famished useless, the horde of
devouring mouths. Interruption of transport
meant entire dependence on local food stuffs;
and, as stocks grew lower and plundering
increased, provisions were seized by the
military.... Theodore, in the first hours of
his new duty, helped to load an armed lorry
with the contents of a grocer’s shop and fight
it through the streets of York. There was
an ugly rush as the driver started his engine;
men who had been foodless for days had
watched, in sullen craving, while the shop was
emptied of its treasure of sacks and tins; and
when the engine buzzed a child wailed miserably,
a woman shrieked “Don’t let them,
don’t let them!” and the whole pack snarled
and surged forward. Wolfish white faces
showed at the tailboard and before the car
drew clear her escort had used their revolvers.
Theodore, not yet hardened to shooting,
seized the nearest missile, a tin of meat, and
hurled it into one of the faces; when they
drew away three or four of the pack were
tearing at each other for the treasure contained
in the tin.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_86">86</span>He noticed, as the days went by, how
quickly he slipped from the outlook and habits
of civilized man and adopted those of the
primitive, even of the animal. It was not
only that he was suspicious of every man,
careful in approach, on the alert and ready for
violence; he learned, like the animal, to be
indifferent to the suffering that did not concern
him. Violence, when it did not affect
him directly, was a noise in the distance—no
more; and as swiftly as he became inured to
bloodshed he grew hardened to the sight of
misery. At first he had sickened when he ate
his rations at the thought of a million-fold
suffering that starved while he filled his
stomach; later, as order’s representative, he
herded and hustled a massed starvation without
scruple, driving it away when it grouped
itself threateningly, shooting when it promised
to give trouble to authority, and looking upon
death, itself, indifferently.</p>
<p class="c006">It amazed him, looking back, to realize the
swiftness with which ordered society had
crumbled; laws, systems, habits of body and
mind—they had gone, leaving nothing but
animal fear and the animal need to be fed.
Within little more than a week of the night
when young Hewlett had called him to watch
<span class="pageno" id="Page_87">87</span>the red flashes and the glare in the sky, there
remained of the fabric of order built up
through the centuries very little but a military
force that was fighting on two sides—against
inward disorder and alien attack—and struggling
to maintain itself alive. Automatically,
inevitably—under pressure of starvation, blind
vagrancy and terror—that which had once
been a people, an administrative whole, was
relapsing into a tribal separatism, the last
barrier against nomadic anarchy.... As
famished destitution overran the country,
localities not yet destitute tried systematically
and desperately to shut out the vagrant and
defended what was left to them by force.
Countrymen beat off the human plague that
devoured their substance and trampled their
crops underfoot; barriers were erected that
no stranger might pass and bloody little
skirmishes were frequent at the outskirts of
villages. As bread grew scarcer and more
precious, the penalties on those who stole it
were increasingly savage; tribal justice—lynch
law—took the place of petty sessions
and assize, and plunderers, even suspected
plunderers, were strung up to trees and their
bodies left dangling as a warning.... And
a day or two later, it might be, the poison-fire
<span class="pageno" id="Page_88">88</span>swept through the fields and devoured the
homes of those who had executed tribal
justice; or a horde of destitution, too strong
to be denied, drove them out; and, homeless
in their turn, they swelled the tide of plunderers
and vagrants.... Man, with bewildering
rapidity, was slipping through the stages
whereby, through the striving of long generations,
he had raised himself from primitive
barbarism and the law that he shares with the
brute.</p>
<p class="c006">Very steadily the process of displacement
continued. On most nights, in one direction
or another, there were sudden outbursts of
light—the glare of explosion or burning buildings
or the greenish-blue reflection of the
poison-fire. The silent engine gave no warning
of its coming, and the first announcement
of danger was the bursting of gas-shell and
high explosive, or the sudden vivid pallor of the
poison-fire as it ran before the wind and swept
along dry fields and hedgerows. Where it
swept it left not only long tracts of burned
crop and black skeleton trees, but, often
enough, the charred bodies of the homeless
whom its rush had outpaced and overtaken....
Sudden and unreasoning panic was frequent—wild
rushes from imaginary threats—and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_89">89</span>there were many towns which, when their
turn came, were shells and empty buildings
only; dead towns, whence the inhabitants
had already fled in a body. York had been
standing all but silent for days when an enemy
swooped down to destroy it and Theodore,
guarding military stores in a camp on the
Ripon road, looked his last on the towers of
the Minster, magnificent against a sea of
flame. Death, in humanity, had ceased to
move him greatly; but he turned away his
head from the death of high human achievement.</p>
<p class="c006">For the first few days of disaster there was a
certain amount of news, or what passed for
news, from the outside world; in districts yet
untouched and not wholly panic-stricken, local
journals struggled out and communiqués—true
or false—were published by the military
authorities. But with the rapid growth of the
life nomadic, the herding and driving to and
fro, with the consequent absence of centres
for the dissemination of news or information,
the outside world withdrew to a distance and
veiled itself in silence unbroken. With the
disappearance of the newspaper there was left
only rumour, and rumour was always current—sometimes
hopeful, sometimes dreadful,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_90">90</span>always wild; to-day, Peace was coming, a
treaty all but signed—and to-morrow London
was in ruins.... No one knew for certain
what was happening out of eyeshot, or could
more than guess how far devastation extended.
This alone was a certainty; that in every
direction that a man might turn, he met those
who were flying from destruction, threatened
or actual; and that night after night and day
after day, humanity crouched before the
science itself had perfected.... Sometimes
there were visible encounters in the air, contending
squadrons that chased, manœuvred
and gave battle; but the invaders, driven off,
returned again and the process of displacement
continued. And, with every hour of its
continuance, the death-roll grew longer, uncounted;
and men, who had struggled to retain
a hold on their humanity and the life
civilized, gave up the struggle, became predatory
beasts and fought with each other for the
means to keep life in their bodies.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">In after years Theodore tried vainly to
remember how long he was quartered in the
camp on the Ripon road—whether it was
weeks or a matter of days only. Then or
later he lost all sense of time, retaining only a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_91">91</span>memory of happenings, of events that followed
each other and connecting them roughly with
the seasons—frosty mornings, wet and wind or
summer heat. There were the nights when
York flamed and the days when thick smoke
hung over it; and the morning when aeroplanes
fought overhead and two crashed
within a mile of the camp. There was the
night of pitched battle with a rabble of the
starving, grown desperate, which rushed the
guard suddenly out of the darkness and beat
and hacked at the doors of the sheds which
contained the hoarded treasure of food.
Theodore, with every other man in the camp,
was turned out hastily to do battle with the
horde of invaders—to shoot into the mass of
them and drive them back to their starvation.
In the end the rush was stemmed and the
camp cleared of the mob; but there was a
hideous five minutes of shots and knife-thrusts
and hand-to-hand struggling before the final
stampede. Even after the stampede the
menace was not at an end; when the sun
rose it showed to the watchers in the camp a
sullen rabble that lingered not a field’s
breadth distant—a couple of hundred wolfish
men and women who could not tear themselves
away from the neighbourhood of food,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_92">92</span>who glared covetously and took hopeless counsel
together till the order to charge them was
given and they broke and fled, spitting back
hatred.</p>
<p class="c006">After that, the night guard was doubled and
the commanding officer applied in haste for
reinforcements; barbed wire entanglements
were stretched round the camp and orders were
given to disperse any crowd that assembled
and lingered in the neighbourhood. Behind
their entanglements and line of sentries the
little garrison lived as on an island in the
flood of anarchy and ruin—a remnant of order,
defending itself against chaos. And, for all
the discipline with which they faced anarchy
and the ruthlessness with which they beat
back chaos, they knew (so often as they dared
to think) that the time might be at hand—must
be at hand, if no deliverance came—when
they, every man of them, would be
swept from their island to the common fate
and become as the creatures, scarce human,
who crawled to them for food and were refused.
When darkness fell and flames showed
red on the horizon, they would wonder how
long before their own turn came—and be
thankful for the lightening in the east; and as
each convoy of lorries drove up to remove
<span class="pageno" id="Page_93">93</span>supplies from their fast dwindling stores, they
would scan the faces of men who were ignorant
and helpless as themselves to see if they were
bearers of good news.... And the news was
always their own news repeated; of ruin and
burning, of famine and the threat of the
famished. No message—save stereotyped
military orders—from that outside world
whence alone they could hope for salvation.</p>
<p class="c006">There remained with Theodore to the end
of his days the dreadful memory of the women.
At the beginning—just at the beginning—of
disaster, authority had connived at a certain
amount of charitable diversion of military
stores for the benefit of women and children;
but as supplies dwindled and destroying
hordes of vagrants multiplied, the tacit permission
was withdrawn. The soldier, the
instrument of order, unfed was an instrument
of order no longer; discipline was discipline
for so long only as it obtained the necessities
of life, and troops whose rations failed them in
the end ceased to be troops and swelled the
flood of vagrant and destitute anarchy. The
useless mouth was the weapon of the enemy;
and authority hardened its heart perforce
against the crying of the useless mouth.</p>
<p class="c006">Once a score or so of women, with a tall,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_94">94</span>frantic girl as their leader, stood for hours at
the edge of the wire entanglement and called
on the soldiers to shoot—if they would not
feed them, to shoot. Then, receiving only
silence as answer, the tall girl cried out that,
by God, the soldiers should be forced to shoot!
and led her companions—some cumbered with
children—to tear and hurl themselves across
the stretch of barbed and twisted wire. As
they scrambled over, bleeding, crying and
their clothes in rags, they were seized by the
wrists and hustled to the gate of the camp—some
limp and effortless, others kicking and
writhing to get free. When the gate was
closed and barred on them they beat on it—then
lay about wretchedly ... and at last
shambled wretchedly away....</p>
<p class="c006">More dreadful even than the women who
dragged with them children they could not
feed, were those who sought to bribe the
possessors of food with the remnant of their
feminine attractions; who eyed themselves
anxiously in streams, pulled their sodden
clothes into a semblance of jauntiness and
made piteous attempts at flirtation. Money
being worthless, since it could buy neither
safety nor food, the price for those who traded
their bodies was paid in a hunk of bread or
<span class="pageno" id="Page_95">95</span>meat.... Those women suffered most who
had no man of their own to forage and fend
for them, and were no longer young enough
for other men to look on with pleasure. They—as
humanity fell to sheer wolfishness and
the right of the strongest—were beaten back
and thrust aside when it came to the sharing-out
of spoil.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">He remembered very clearly a day when
news that was authentic reached them from
the outside world; an aeroplane came down
with engine-trouble in a field on the edge of
the camp, and the haggard-faced pilot, beset
with breathless questions, laughed roughly
when they asked him of London—how lately
he had been there, what was happening?
“Oh yes, I was over it a day or two ago.
You’re no worse off than they are down south—London’s
been on the run for days.” He
turned back to his engine and whistled tunelessly
through the silence that had fallen on
his hearers.... Theodore said it over slowly
to himself, “London’s been on the run for
days.” If so—if so—then what, in God’s
name, of Phillida?</p>
<p class="c006">Hitherto he had fought back his dread for
Phillida, denying to himself, as he denied to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_96">96</span>others, the rumour that disaster was widespread
and general, and insisting that she, at
least, was safe. If there was one thing intolerable,
one thing that could not be, it was
Phillida vagrant, Phillida starving—his dainty
lady bedraggled and grovelling for her bread....
like the haggard women who had beaten
with their hands on the gate....</p>
<p class="c006">“It must stop,” he choked suddenly, “it
must stop—it can’t go on!”</p>
<p class="c006">The pilot broke off from his whistling to
stare at the distorted face.</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” he said grimly, “it can’t go on.
What’s more, it’s stopping, by degrees—stopping
itself; you mayn’t have noticed it
yet, but we do. Taking ’em all round they’re
leaving off, not coming as thick as they did.
And”—his mouth twisted ironically—“we’re
leaving off and for the same reason.”</p>
<p class="c006">“The same reason?” someone echoed him.</p>
<p class="c006">“Because we can’t go on.... You don’t
expect us to carry on long in this, do you?”
He shrugged and jerked his head towards a
smoke cloud on the western skyline. “That’s
what ran us—gone up in smoke. Food and
factories and transport and Lord knows what
beside. The things that ran us and kept us
going ... We’re living on our own fat now—what
<span class="pageno" id="Page_97">97</span>there is of it—and so are the people on
the other side. We can just keep going as
long as it lasts; but it’s getting precious short
now, and when we’ve finished it—when there’s
no fat left!...” He laughed unpleasantly
and stared at the rolling smoke cloud.</p>
<p class="c006">Someone else asked him about the rumour
ever-current of negotiation—whether there
was truth in it, whether he had heard anything?</p>
<p class="c006">“Much what you’ve heard,” he said, and
shrugged his shoulders. “There’s talk—there
always is—plenty of it; but I don’t suppose
I know any more than you do.... It stands
to reason that someone must be trying to put
an end to it—but who’s trying to patch it up
with who?... And what is there left to
patch? Lord knows! They say the real
trouble is that when governments have gone
there’s no one to negotiate with. No responsible
authority—sometimes no authority at
all. Nothing to get hold of. You can’t make
terms with rabble; you can’t even find out
what it wants—and it’s rabble now, here,
there, and everywhere. When there’s nothing
else left, how do you get hold of it, treat with
it? Who makes terms, who signs, who orders?...
Meanwhile, we go on till we’re told to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_98">98</span>stop—those of us that are left.... And I
suppose they’re doing much the same—keeping
on because they don’t know how to
stop.”</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore asked what he meant when he
spoke of “no government.” “You can’t
mean it literally? You can’t mean...?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Why not?” said the pilot. “Is there
any here?”—and jerked his head, this time
towards the road. Its long white ribbon was
spotted with groups and single figures of
vagrants—scarecrow vagrants—crawling onward
they knew not whither.</p>
<p class="c006">“See that,” he said, “see that—does anyone
govern it? Make rules for it, defend it,
keep it alive?... And that’s everywhere.”</p>
<p class="c006">Someone whispered back “Everywhere”
under his breath; the rest stared in silence
at the spotted white ribbon of road.</p>
<p class="c006">“You can’t mean...?” said Theodore
again.</p>
<p class="c006">The airman shrugged his shoulders and
laughed roughly.</p>
<p class="c006">“I believe,” he said, “there are still some
wretched people who call themselves a government,
try to be a government—at least, there
were the other day.... Sometimes I wonder
<i>how</i> they try, what they say to each other—poor
<span class="pageno" id="Page_99">99</span>devils! How they look when the heads
of what used to be departments bring them in
the day’s report? Can’t you imagine their
silly, ghastly faces?... Even if they’re still
in existence, what in God’s name can they do—except
let us go on killing each other in the
hope that something may turn up. If they
give orders, sign papers, make laws, does anyone
listen, pay any attention? Does it make
any difference to <i>that</i>?” Again he jerked his
head towards the road, and in the word as in
the gesture was loathing, fear and contempt.
“And in other parts of what used to be the
civilized world—where this sort of hell has
been going on longer—what do you suppose
is happening?”</p>
<p class="c006">No one answered; he laughed again roughly,
as if he were contemptuous of their hopes,
and a man beside Theodore—a corporal—swung
round on him, white-faced and snarling.</p>
<p class="c006">“Damn you!... I’ve got a girl.... I’ve
got a girl!...”</p>
<p class="c006">He choked, moved away and stood rigid,
staring at the road.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore heard himself asking, “If there
isn’t any government—what is there?”</p>
<p class="c006">“What’s left of the army,” said the other,
“that’s all that hangs together. Bits of it,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_100">100</span>here and there—getting smaller, losing touch
with the other bits; hanging on to its rations—what’s
left of ’em.... And we hold
together just as long as we can fight back the
rabble; not an hour, not a minute longer!
When we’ve gnawed our way through the
last of our rations—what then?... You
may do what you like, but I’m keeping a shot
for myself. Whether we’re through with it or
whether we’re not. Just stopping fighting
won’t clear up this mess.... And I’ll die—what
I am. Not rabble!”</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Whether after days or whether after weeks,
there came a time when they ceased to have
dealings with the world beyond their wire
defences; when the store-sheds in the camp
were all but emptied of their hoard of foodstuffs
and such military authority as might
still exist took no further interest in the doings
of a useless garrison. Orders and communications,
once frequent, grew fewer, and finally,
as military authority crumbled, they were left
to isolation, to their own defence and devices.
Since no man any longer had need of them,
they were cut off from intercourse with those
other remnants of the life disciplined whence
lorries had once arrived in search of rations;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_101">101</span>separated from such other bands of their fellows
as still held together, they were no longer
part of an army, were nothing but a band of
armed men. Though their own daily rations
were cut down to the barest necessities of life,
there was little grumbling, since even the
dullest knew the reason; as the airman had
told them, they were living on their own fat,
for so long as their own fat lasted. For all
their isolation, their fears and daily perils
kept them disciplined; they held together,
obeyed orders and kept watch, not because
they still felt themselves part of a nation or a
military force, but because there remained in
their common keeping the means to support
bare life. It was not loyalty or patriotism, but
the sense of their common danger, their common
need of defence against the famished
world outside their camp, that kept them
comrades, obedient to a measure of discipline,
and made them still a community.</p>
<p class="c006">There had been altercation of the fiercest
before they were left to themselves—when
lorries drove up for food which was refused
them, on the ground that the camp had not
sufficient for its own needs. Disputes at the
refusal were furious and violent; men, driven
out forcibly, went off shouting threats that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_102">102</span>they would come back and take what was
denied them—would bring their machine-guns
and take it. Those who yet had the wherewithal
to keep life in their bodies knew the
necessity that prompted the threat and lived
thenceforth in a state of siege against men who
had once been their comrades. With the
giving out of military supplies and the consequent
breaking of the bonds of discipline,
bands of soldiers, scouring the countryside,
were an added terror to their fellow-vagrants
and, so long as their ammunition lasted, fared
better than starvation unarmed.... If central
authority existed it gave no sign; while
military force that had once been united—an
army—dissolved into its primitive elements:
tribes of armed men, held together by their
fear of a common enemy. In the wreck of
civilization, of its systems, institutions and
polity, there endured longest that form of
order which had first evolved from the chaos
of barbarism—the disciplined strength of the
soldier.... A people retracing its progress
from chaos retraced it step by step.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_103">103</span>
<h2 class="c004">VII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">The end of civilization came to Theodore
Savage and his fellows as it had come to
uncounted thousands.</p>
<p class="c006">There had been a still warm day with a haze
on it—he judged it early autumn or perhaps
late summer; for the rest, like any other day
in the camp routine—of watchfulness, of
scanning the sky and the distance, of the passing
of vagabond starvation, of an evil smell
drifting with the lazy air from the dead who
lay unburied where they fell. Before nightfall
the haze was lifted by a cold little wind
from the east; and soon after darkness a
moon at the full cast white, merciless light and
black shadow.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore was asleep when the alarm was
given—by a shout at the door of his hut.
One of ten or a dozen, aroused like himself, he
grabbed at his rifle as he stumbled to his feet;
believing in the first hurried moment of waking
that he was called to drive back yet another
<span class="pageno" id="Page_104">104</span>night onslaught of the starving enemy without.
He ran out of the hut into a strong,
pallid glare that wavered.... A stretch of
gorse and bramble-patch two hundred yards
away was alight, burning lividly, and further
off the same bluish flame was running like a
wave across a field. Enemy aeroplanes were
dropping their fire-bombs—here and there,
flash on flash, of pale, inextinguishable flame.</p>
<p class="c006">It was scarcely five minutes from the time
he had been roused before the camp and its
garrison had ceased to exist as a community,
and Theodore Savage and his living comrades
were vagabonds on the face of the earth. The
gorse and bramble-patch lay to the eastward
and the wind was blowing from the east; the
flames rushed triumphantly at a black clump
of fir trees—great torches that lit up the
neighbourhood. The guiding hand in the
terror overhead had a mark laid ready for his
aim; the camp, with its camouflaged huts and
sheds, seen plainly as in broadest daylight.
His next bomb burst in the middle of the camp
blowing half-a-score of soldiers into bloody
fragments and firing the nearest wooden
building. While it burned, the terror overhead
struck again and again—then stooped to its
helpless quarry and turned a machine-gun
<span class="pageno" id="Page_105">105</span>on men in trenches and men running hither
and thither in search of a darkness that might
cover them.... That, for Theodore Savage,
was the ending of civilization.</p>
<p class="c006">With the crash of the first explosion he
cowered instinctively and pressed himself
against the wall of the nearest shed; the
flames, rushing upward, showed him others
cowering like himself, all striving to obliterate
themselves, to shrink, to deny their humanity.
Even in his extremity of bodily fear he was
conscious of merciless humiliation; the machine-gun
crackled at scurrying little creatures
that once were men and that now were
but impotent flesh at the mercy of mechanical
perfection.... Mechanical perfection, the
work of men’s hands, soared over its creators,
spat down at their helplessness and defaced
them; they cringed in corners till it found
them out and ran from it screaming, without
power to strike back at the invisible beast that
pursued them. Without power even to surrender
and yield to its mercy; they could only
hate impotently—and run....</p>
<p class="c006">As they ran they broke instinctively—avoiding
each other, since a group made a
mark for a gunner. Theodore, when he dared
cower no longer, rushed with a dozen through
<span class="pageno" id="Page_106">106</span>the gate of the camp but, once outside it, they
scattered right and left and there was no one
near him when his flight ended with a stumble.
He stayed where he had fallen, a good mile
from the camp, in the blessed shadow of a
hedgerow; he crept close to it and lay in the
blackness of the shadow, breathing great sobs
and trembling—crouching in dank grass and
peering through the leafage at the distant
furnace he had fled from. The crackling of
machine-guns had ceased, but here and there,
for miles around were stretches of flame
running rapidly before a dry wind. Half a
mile away an orchard was blazing with hayricks;
and he drew a long sigh of relief when
another flare leaped up—further off. That
was miles away, that last one; they were
going, thank God they were going!... He
waited to make sure—half an hour or more—then
stumbled back in search of his companions;
through fields on to the road that
led past what once had been the camp.</p>
<p class="c006">On his way he met others, dark figures
creeping back like himself; by degrees a
score or so gathered in the roadway and stood
in little groups, some muttering, some silent,
as they watched the flames burn themselves
out. There were bodies lying in the road and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_107">107</span>beside it—men shot from above as they ran;
and the living turned them over to look at
their distorted faces.... No one was in
authority; their commanding officer had
been killed outright by the bursting of the
first bomb, one of the subalterns lay huddled
in the roadway, just breathing. So much
they knew.... In the beginning there was
relief that they had come through alive; but,
with the passing of the first instinct of relief,
came understanding of the meaning of being
alive.... The breath in their bodies, the
knowledge that they still walked the earth:
and for the rest, vagrancy and beast-right—the
right of the strongest to live!</p>
<p class="c006">They took counsel together as the night crept
over them and—because there was nothing
else to do—planned to search the charred
ruin as the fire died out, in the hope of salvage
from the camp. They counted such few, odd
possessions as remained to them: cartridge
belts, rifles thrown away in flight and then
picked up in the road, the contents of their
pockets—no more.... In the end, for the
most part, they slept the dead sleep of exhaustion
till morning—to wake with cold rain
on their faces.</p>
<p class="c006">The rain, for all its wretchedness to men
<span class="pageno" id="Page_108">108</span>without shelter, was so far their friend that
it beat down the flames on the smouldering
timbers which were all that remained of their
fortress and rock of defence. They burrowed
feverishly among the black wreckage of their
store-sheds, blistering and burning their fingers
by too eager handling of logs that still flickered,
unearthing, now and then, some scrap of
charred meat but, for the most part, nothing
but lumps of molten metal that had once been
the tins containing food. In their pressing
anxiety to avert the peril of hunger they were
heedless of a peril yet greater; their search
had attracted the attention of others—scarecrow
vagrants, the rabble of the roads, who
saw them from a distance and came hurrying
in the hope of treasure-trove. The first single
spies retreated at the order of superior and
disciplined numbers; but with time their own
numbers were swollen by those who halted
at the rumour of food, and there hovered
round the searchers a shifting, snarling, envious
crowd that drew gradually nearer till faced
with the threat of pointed rifles. Even that
only stayed it for a little—and, spurred on by
hunger, imagining riches where none existed,
it rushed suddenly forward in a mob that
might not be held.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_109">109</span>Those who had rifles fired at it and men in
the foremost ranks went down, unheeded in
the rush of their fellows; those who might
have hesitated were thrust forward by the
frantic need behind, and the torrent of misery
broke against the little group of soldiers in a
tumult of grappling and screeching. Women,
like men, asserted their beast-right to food—when
sticks and knives failed them, asserted
it with claws and teeth; unhuman creatures,
with eyes distended and wide, yelling mouths,
went down with their fingers at each other’s
throats, their nails in each other’s flesh....
Theodore clubbed a length of burnt wood
and struck out ... saw a man drop with a
broken, bloody face and a woman back from
him shrieking ... then was gripped from
behind, with an arm round his neck, and went
down.... The famished creatures fought
above his body and beat out his senses with
their feet.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">When life came back to him the sun was
very low in the west. In his head little
hammers beat intolerably and all his strained
body ached with bruises as he raised himself,
slowly and groaning, and leaned on an arm to
look round. He lay much where he had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_110">110</span>fallen, but the soldiers, the crowd of human
beasts, had vanished; the bare stretch of
camp, still smoking in places, was silent and
almost deserted. Two or three bending and
intent figures were hovering round the charred
masses of wreckage—moving slowly, stopping
often, peering as they walked and thrusting
their hands into the ashes, in the hope of some
fragment that those who searched before them
had missed. A woman lay face downwards
with her dead arm flung across his feet; further
off were other bodies—which the searchers
passed without notice. Three or four were
in uniform, the bodies of men who had once
been his comrades; others, for the benefit of
the living, had been stripped, or half-stripped,
of their clothing.</p>
<p class="c006">He lifted himself painfully and crawled on
hands and knees, with many groans and halts,
to the stream that had formed one border of
the camp—where he drank, bathed his head
and washed the dried blood from his scratches.
With a measure of physical relief—the blessing
of cool water to a burning head and throat—came
a clearer understanding and, with clearer
understanding, fear.... He knew himself
alone in chaos.</p>
<p class="c006">As soon as he might he limped back to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_111">111</span>the smouldering wood-heaps and accosted a
woman who was grubbing in a mess of black
refuse. Did she know what had become of the
soldiers? Which way they had gone when
they left? The woman eyed him sullenly,
mistrustful and resenting his neighbourhood—knew
nothing, had not seen any soldiers—and
turned again to grub in her refuse. A skeleton
of a man was no wiser; had only just
turned off the road to search, did not know
what had happened except that there must
have been a fight—but it was all over when he
came up. He also had seen no soldiers—only
the dead ones over there.... Theodore
saw in their eyes that they feared him, were
dreading lest he should compete with them
for their possible treasure of refuse.</p>
<p class="c006">For the time being a sickly faintness deprived
him of all wish for food; he left the
sullen creatures to their clawing and grubbing,
went back to the water, drank and soused once
more, then crept farther off in search of a
softer ground to lie on. After a few score
yards of painful dragging and halting, he
stretched himself exhausted on a strip of dank
grass at the roadside—and dozed where he fell
until the morning.</p>
<p class="c006">With sunrise and awakening came the pangs
<span class="pageno" id="Page_112">112</span>of sharp hunger, and he dragged himself
limping through mile after mile in search of
the wherewithal to stay them. He was giddy
with weakness and near to falling when he
found his first meal in a stretch of newly-burned
field—the body of a rabbit that the
fire had blackened as it passed. He fell upon
it, hacked it with his clasp-knife and ate half
of it savagely, looking over his shoulder to see
that no one watched him; the other half he
thrust into his pocket to serve him for another
meal. He had learned already to live furtively
and hide what he possessed from the
neighbours who were also his enemies. Next
day he fished furtively—with a hook improvised
out of twisted wire and worm-bait dug
up by his clasp-knife; lurking in bushes on
the river-bank, lest others, passing by, should
note him and take toll by force of his catch.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">He lived thenceforth as men have always
lived when terror drives them this way and
that, and the earth, untended, has ceased to
yield her bounties; warring with his fellows
and striving to outwit them for the remnant of
bounty that was left. He hunted and scraped
for his food like a homeless dog; when found,
he carried it apart in stealth and bolted it
<span class="pageno" id="Page_113">113</span>secretly, after the fashion of a dog with his
offal. In time all his mental values changed
and were distorted: he saw enemies in all
men, existed only to exist—that he might fill
his stomach—and death affected him only
when he feared it for himself. He had grown
to be self-centred, confined to his body and its
daily wants and that side of his nature which
concerned itself with the future and the needs
of others was atrophied. He had lost the
power of interest in all that was not personal,
material and immediate; and, as the uncounted
days dragged out into weeks, even
the thought of Phillida, once an ever-present
agony, ceased to enter much into his daily
struggle to survive. He starved and was
afraid: that was all. His life was summed
up in the two words, starvation and fear.</p>
<p class="c006">At night, as a rule, he sheltered in a house
or deserted farm-building that stood free for
anyone to enter—sometimes alone, but as
often as not in company. Starved rabble, as
long as it hunted for food, avoided its rivals
in the chase; but when night, perforce,
brought cessation of the hunt, the herding
instinct reasserted itself and lasted through
the hours of darkness. As autumn sharpened,
guarded fires were lit in cellars where they
<span class="pageno" id="Page_114">114</span>could not be seen from above and fed with
broken furniture, with fragments of doors and
palings; and one by one, human beasts would
slink in and huddle down to the warmth—some
uncertainly, seeking a new and untried
refuge, and others returning to their shelter
of the night before. The little gangs who
shared fire and roof for the space of a night
never ate in each other’s company; food was
invariably devoured apart, and those who had
possessed themselves of more than an immediate
supply would hide and even bury it in a
secret place before they came in contact with
their fellows. Hence no gang, no little herd,
was permanent or contained within itself
the beginnings of a social system; its members
shared nothing but the hours of a night
and performed no common social duties. A
face became familiar because seen for a night
or two in the glow of a common fire; when it
vanished none knew—and none troubled to
ask—whether a man had died between sunrise
and sunset or whether he had drifted further
off in his daily search for the means to keep
life in his body. When a man died in the
night, with others round him, the manner of
his ending was known; otherwise he passed
out of life without notice from those who yet
<span class="pageno" id="Page_115">115</span>crawled on the earth.... With morning the
herd of starvelings that had sheltered together
broke up and foraged, each man for himself
and his own cravings; rooted in fields and
trampled gardens, crouched on river-banks
fishing, laid traps for vermin, ransacked
shops and houses where scores had preceded
them.... And some, it was muttered—as
time went on and the need grew yet starker—fed
horribly ... and therefore plentifully....</p>
<p class="c006">There were nights—many nights—when a
herd broke in panic from its shelter and
scattered to the winds of heaven at an alarm
of the terror overhead; and always, as starvation
pressed, it dwindled—by death and the
tendency to dissolve into single nomads,
who (such as survived) regrouped themselves
elsewhere, to scatter and re-group again....
With repeated wandering—now this way, now
that, as hope and hunger prompted—went
all sense of direction and environment; the
nomads, hunting always, drifted into broken
streets or dead villages and through them to
the waste of open country—not knowing
where they were, in the end not caring, and
turned back by a river or the sea.</p>
<p class="c006">The sight or suspicion of food and plunder
would always draw vagrancy together in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_116">116</span>crowds; district after district untouched by
an enemy had been swept out of civilized
existence by the hordes which fell on the
remnants of prosperity and tore them; which
ransacked shops and dwellings, slaughtered
sheep, horses, cattle and devoured them and,
often enough, in a fury of destruction and
vehement envy, set light to houses and barns
lest others might fare better than themselves.
But when flocks, herds and storehouses had
vanished, when agriculture, like the industry
of cities, had ceased to exist and nothing
remained to devour and plunder, the motive
for common action passed. With equality
of wretchedness union was impossible, and
every man’s hand against his neighbour; if
groups formed, here and there, of the stronger
and more brutal, who joined forces for common
action, they held together only for so long as
their neighbours had possessions that could
be wrested from them—stores of food or
desirable women; once the neighbours were
stripped of their all and there was nothing
more to prey on, the group fell apart or its
members turned on each other. In the life
predatory man had ceased to be creative; in a
world where no one could count on a morrow,
construction and forethought had no meaning.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_117">117</span>
<h2 class="c004">VIII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">In a world where all were vagabond and
brutal, where each met each with suspicion
and all men were immersed in the intensity of
their bodily needs, very few had thoughts to
exchange. Mentally, as well as actually, they
lived to themselves and where they did not
distrust they were indifferent; the starvelings
who slunk into shelter that they might huddle
for the night round a common fire found little
to say to one another. As human desire
concentrated itself on the satisfaction of
animal cravings, so human speech degenerated
into mere expression of those cravings and the
emotions aroused by them. Only once or
twice while he starved and drifted did Theodore
talk with men who sought to give expression
to more than their present terrors and the
immediate needs of their bodies, who used
speech that was the vehicle of thought.</p>
<p class="c006">One such he remembered—met haphazard,
as all men met each other—when he sheltered
for an autumn night on the outskirts of a town
<span class="pageno" id="Page_118">118</span>left derelict. With falling dusk came a sudden
sharp patter of rain and he took refuge
hurriedly in the nearest house—a red-brick
villa, standing silent with gaping windows.
What was left of the door swung loosely on its
hinges—half the lower panels had been hacked
away to serve as firewood; the hall was
befouled with the feet of many searchers and
of the furniture remained but a litter of rags
and fragments that could not be burned.</p>
<p class="c006">He thought the place empty till he scented
smoke from the basement; whereupon he
crept down the stairs, soft-footed and alert,
to discover that precaution was needless.
There was only one occupant of the house, a
man plainly dying; a livid hollow-eyed skeleton
who coughed and trembled as he knelt by
the grate and tried to blow damp sticks into a
flame. Theodore, in his own interests, took
charge of the fire, ransacked the house for
inflammable material and tore up strips of
broken boarding that the other was too feeble
to wrestle with. When the blaze flared up, the
sick man cowered to it, stretched out his hands—filthy
skin-covered bones—and thanked him;
whereat Theodore turned suddenly and stared.
It was long—how long?—since any man had
troubled to thank him; and this man, for all
<span class="pageno" id="Page_119">119</span>his verminous misery, had a voice that was
educated, cultured.... Something in the
tone of it—the manner—took Theodore back
to the world where men ate courteously
together, were companions, considered each
other; and instinctively, almost without
effort, he offered a share of his foraging. The
offer was refused, whereat Theodore wondered
still more; but the man, near death, was past
desire for food and shook his head almost with
repulsion. Perhaps it was the fever that had
turned him against food that loosened his
tongue and set him talking—or perhaps he,
also, by another’s voice and manner, was reminded
of his past humanity.</p>
<p class="c006">“‘My mind to me a kingdom is,’” he
quoted suddenly. “Who wrote that—do you
remember?”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” Theodore said, “I’ve forgotten.”
He stared at the cowering, hunched figure with
its shaking hands stretched to the blaze.
The man, it might be, was mad as well as
dying—he had met many such in his wanderings;
babbling of verse as someone—who was
it?—had babbled in dying of green fields.</p>
<p class="c006">“‘My mind to me a kingdom is,’” the sick
man repeated. “Well, even if we’ve forgotten
who wrote it, there’s one thing about him
<span class="pageno" id="Page_120">120</span>that’s certain; he didn’t know what we know—hadn’t
lived in our kind of hell. The place
where you haven’t a mind—only fear and a
stomach.... The flesh and the devil—hunger
and fear; they haven’t left us a
world!... But if there’s ever a world again,
I believe I shall have learned how to write.
Now I know what we are—the fundamentals
and the nakedness....”</p>
<p class="c006">“Were you a writer?” Theodore asked
him—and at the question his old humanity
stirred curiously within him.</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” said the other, “I was a writer....
When I think of what I wrote—the little,
little things that seemed important!... I
spent a year once—a whole good year—on a
book about a woman who was finding out she
didn’t love her husband. She was well fed
and housed, lived comfortably—and I wrote of
her as if she were a tragedy. The work I put
into it—the work and the thought! I tried to
get what I called atmosphere.... And all
the time there was this in us—this raw, red
thing—and I never even touched it, never
guessed what we were without our habits....
Do you know where we made the mistake?”—he
turned suddenly to Theodore, thrusting
out a finger—“We were not civilized—it was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_121">121</span>only our habits that were civilized; but we
thought they were flesh of our flesh and bone
of our bone. Underneath, the beast in us was
always there—lying in wait till his time came.
The beast that is ourselves, that is flesh of our
flesh—clothed in habits, in rags that have been
torn from us.”</p>
<p class="c006">He broke off to cough horribly and lay
breathless and exhausted for a time; then,
when breath came back to him, talked on
while Theodore listened—not so much to his
words as to a voice from the world that had
passed.</p>
<p class="c006">“The religions were right,” he said. “They
were right through and through; the only
sane thing and the only safe thing is humility—to
realize your sin, to confess it and repent....
We—we were bestial and we did not
know it; and when you don’t even suspect
you sin how can you repent and save your soul
alive?... We dressed ourselves and taught
ourselves the little politenesses and ceremonies
which made it easy to forget that we were
brutes in our hearts; we never faced our own
possibilities of evil and beastliness, never
confessed and repented them, took no precautions
against them. Our limitless possibilities....
We thought our habits—we called
<span class="pageno" id="Page_122">122</span>them virtues—were as real and natural and
ingrained as our instincts; and now what is
left of our habits? When we should have
been crying, ‘Lord have mercy on us,’ we
believed in ourselves, our enlightenment and
progress. Enlightenment that ended as
science applied to destruction and progress
that has led us—to this.... And to-day it
has gone, every shred of it, and we’re back at
what we started with—hunger and lust!
Brute instincts ... and the primitive passion,
hatred—against those who thwart hunger and
lust. Nothing else—how can there be anything
else? When we lost all we loved, we lost
the habit and power of loving.... ‘My
mind to me a kingdom is’—of hatred and
hunger and lust.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” said Theodore—and he, too, stared
at the fire.... What the other had said was
truth and truth only. Even Phillida had left
him; the power of loving her was gone. “I
hadn’t thought of it like that—but it’s right....
We can only hate.”</p>
<p class="c006">“It’s that,” said the dying man, “that’s
beyond all torment.... God pity us!”</p>
<p class="c006">He covered his eyes and sat silent until
Theodore asked him, “Does that mean you
still believe in God?”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_123">123</span>“There’s Law,” said the other. “Is that
God?... We have got to see into our own
souls and to pay for everything we take.
That’s all I know, so far—except that what we
think we own—owns us. That’s what the
wise men meant by renunciation.... It’s
what we made and thought we owned that has
turned on us—the creatures that were born
for our pleasure and power, to increase our
comfort and our riches. As we made them
they fastened on us—set their claws in us—and
they have taken our minds from us as well
as our bodies. As we made them, they followed
the law of their life. We created life
without a soul; but it was life and it went
its own way.”</p>
<p class="c006">Crouched to the fire, and between his bouts
of coughing, he played with the idea and insisted
on it. Everything that we made, that
we thought dead and dumb, had a life that we
could not control. In the case of books and
art we admitted the fact, had a name for the
life, called it influence: influence a form of
independent existence.... In the same way
we took metals and welded them, made
machines; which were beasts, potent beasts,
whose destiny was the same as our own. To
live and develop and, developing, to turn on
<span class="pageno" id="Page_124">124</span>the power that enslaved them.... That was
what had happened; they had made themselves
necessary, fastened on us and, grown
strong enough, had turned on their masters
and killed—even though they died in the
killing. The revolt against servitude had
always been accounted a virtue in men and
the law of all life was the same. The beasts
we had made could not live without us, but
they would have their revenge before they
died.</p>
<p class="c006">“Think of us,” he said, “how we run and
squeal and hide from them!... The patient
servants, our goods and chattels, who were
brought into life for our pleasure—they chase
us while we run and squeal and hide!”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” Theodore answered, “I’ve felt that,
too—the humiliation.”</p>
<p class="c006">“The humiliation,” the sick man nodded.
“Always in the end the slave rules his master—it’s
the price paid for servitude, possession.
I tell you, they were wise men who preached
renunciation—before what we own takes hold
of us and possession turns to servitude. For
there’s a law of average in all things—have
you ever felt it as I have? A law of balance
which we never strike aright.... When the
mighty tread hard enough on the humble and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_125">125</span>meek, the humble and meek are exalted and
begin to tread hard in their turn. That’s
obvious and we’ve generally known it; but
it’s the same in what we call material things.
We rise into the air—make machines that can
fly—and grovel underground to protect ourselves
from the flying-man. As we struck the
balance to the one side, so it has to swing back
on the other; a few men rise high into the
air and many creep down into trenches and
cellars, crouch flat.... If we could work out
the numbers and heights mathematically, be
sure that we should strike the perfect balance—represented
by the surface of the earth.
Balance—in all things balance.”</p>
<p class="c006">He rambled on, perhaps half-delirious,
coughing out his thoughts and theories concerning
a world he was leaving.... In all
things balance, inevitably; the purpose of life
which, so far, we sought blindly—by passion
and recoil from it, by excess and consequent
exhaustion.... It was in the cities where
men herded, where life swarmed, that death
had come most thickly, that desolation was
swiftest and most complete. The ground
underneath them needed rest from men;
there was an average of life it could support
and bear with. Now, the average exceeded, the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_126">126</span>cities lay ruined, were silent, knew the peace
they had craved for—while those who once
swarmed in them avoided them in fear or
scattered themselves in the open country,
finding no sustenance in brickwork, stone or
paved street.... With the machine and its
consequence, the industrial system, population
had increased beyond the average allotted to
the race; now the balance was righting itself
by a very massacre of famine—induced by the
self-same process of invention which had
fostered reproduction unhindered. Because
millions too many had crawled upon earth,
long stretches of earth must lie waste and
desolate till the average had worked itself
out.... The art of life was adjustment of the
balance in all things—was action and reaction
rightly applied, was provision of counterweight,
discovery of the destined mean. Was
control of Truth, lest it turn into a lie; was
check upon the power and velocity of Good
ere it swung to immeasurable Evil....</p>
<p class="c006">The fire, for want of more wood to pile on
it, had died low, to a flicker in the ashes, and
the two men sat almost in darkness; the one,
between the bouts that shook him, whispering
out the tenets of his Law; the other, now
listening, now staring back into the world
<span class="pageno" id="Page_127">127</span>that once was—and ever should be.... He
was with Markham, listening to the Westminster
chimes—(on the crest of the centuries,
Markham had said)—when there were sudden
yelping screams outside and a patter of feet
on the road. The human rats who had crept
into the town for shelter from the night were
bolting in panic from their holes.</p>
<p class="c006">“They’re running,” said the dying man
and felt towards the stairs. “It’s gas—it
must be gas! Oh God, where’s the door—where’s
the door?”</p>
<p class="c006">As they groped and stumbled through the
door and up the stairway, he was clutching at
Theodore’s arm and gasping in an ecstasy of
terror; as fearful of losing his few poor hours
of life as if they had been years of health and
usefulness. In the open air was darkness with
figures flying dimly by; a thin stream of
panic that raced against death by suffocation.</p>
<p class="c006">The man with death on him held to Theodore’s
arm and besought him, for Christ’s sake,
not to leave him—he could run if he were only
helped! Theodore let him cling for a dragging
pace or two; then, looking behind him,
saw a woman reel, clawing the air.</p>
<p class="c006">He wrenched himself free and ran on till he
could run no further.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_128">128</span>
<h2 class="c004">IX</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">It was somewhere towards the end of autumn
that Theodore Savage realized that the war
had come to an end—so far, at least, as his
immediate England was concerned. What
was happening elsewhere he and his immediate
England had no means of knowing and were
long past caring to know. There was no
definite ending but a leaving-off, a slackening;
the attacks—the burnings and panics—by
degrees were fewer and not only fewer but less
devastating, because carried out with smaller
forces; there were days and nights without
alarm, without smoke cloud or glow on the
horizon. Then yet longer intervals—and so
on to complete cessation.... By the time
the nights had grown long and frosty the war
that was organized and alien had ended; there
remained only the daily, personal and barbaric
form of war wherein every man’s hand was
raised against his neighbour and enemy.
That warfare ceased not and could not cease—until
the human herd had reduced itself to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_129">129</span>the point at which the bare earth could support
it.</p>
<p class="c006">It seemed to him later a wonder—almost a
miracle—that he had come alive through the
months of war and after; at times he stood
amazed that any had lived in the waste of
hunger and violence, of pestilence and rotting
bodies which for months was the world as he
knew it. He was near death not once nor a
score of times, but daily; death from exhaustion
or the envy of men who were starved and
reckless as himself. The mockery of peace
brought no plenty or hope of it, no sign of
reconstruction or dawn of new order; reconstruction
and order were rank impossibilities
so long as human creatures preyed on each
other in a land swept bare, and prowled after
the manner of wolves. No revival of common
life, no system was possible until earth once
more brought forth her fruits.</p>
<p class="c006">He judged, by the length of the nights, that
it was somewhere about the middle of November
when the first snow came suddenly and
thickly; the harbinger and onslaught of a
fiercely hard winter that killed in their thousands
the gaunt human beasts who tore at each
other for the refuse and vermin that was food.
In the all-pervading dearth and starvation
<span class="pageno" id="Page_130">130</span>there was only one form of animal life that
increased and flourished mightily; the rat
overran empty buildings, found dreadful
sustenance in street and field and, in turn, was
hunted, trapped and fed on.</p>
<p class="c006">With the coming of winter the human remnant
was perforce less vagrant and migratory,
and Theodore, driven by weather to shelter,
lived for weeks in what once had been a country
town, a cluster of dead houses with, here
and there, a silent factory. Only the buildings,
the semblance of a township, remained;
the befouled and neglected body whence the
life of a community had fled; and he never
knew what its living name had been or what
was the manner of industry or commerce
whereby it had supported its inhabitants.
It lay in a flattish agricultural country and a
railway had run through its outskirts; the
rusted metals stretched north and south
and the remnants of a station still existed—platforms,
charred buildings and trucks and
locomotives in sidings. Perhaps the charred
buildings had been burned in a fury of drunken
and insane destruction, perhaps shivering
destitution had set light to them for the sake
of a few hours’ warmth.</p>
<p class="c006">The shell of the town—its brickwork and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_131">131</span>stone—was still practically intact; it was
anarchy, pillage and starvation, not the
violence of an enemy, that had reduced it to
a city of the dead. The means of supporting
life were absent, but certain forms of what
had once been luxury remained and were
counted as nothing. At a corner of the main
street stood a jeweller’s premises which, time
and again, had been entered and ransacked;
the dwelling-house behind it contained not so
much as a fragment of dried crust but in the
shop itself rings, brooches and pendants were
still lying for any man to take—disordered,
scattered and trampled underfoot, because
worthless to those who craved for bread.
The only item of jeweller’s stock that still
had value to starving men was a watch—if it
furnished a burning-glass, a means of lighting
a fire when other means were unavailable.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore lived through the winter—as all
his fellows lived—destructively, on the legacy
and remnant of other men’s savings and
makings; scraping and grubbing in other
men’s ground, burning furniture and woodwork,
the product of other men’s labours, and
taking no thought for the morrow. At the
beginning of winter some four or five score of
human shadows, men and women, crept about
<span class="pageno" id="Page_132">132</span>the dead streets and the fields beyond them
in their daily quest for the means to keep life
in their bodies; but, as the weeks drew on
and the winter hardened, starvation and the
sickness born of starvation reduced their
numbers by a half. Those lived best who
were most skilful at the trapping of vermin;
and they had long been existing on little but
rat-flesh, when some hunters of rats, on the
track of their prey, discovered a treasure
beyond price—a godsend—in the shape of
sacks of grain in the cellar of an empty
brewery.</p>
<p class="c006">The discovery meant more than a supply
of food and the staving-off of death by starvation;
with the possession of resources that,
with care, might last for weeks there came
into being a common interest, the fellowship
that makes a social system. After the first
wild struggle—the rush to fill their hands and
cram their gnawing stomachs—the shadows
and skeletons of men controlled their instincts
and took counsel; the fact that their stomachs
were full and their craving satisfied gave back
to them the power of construction, of forethought
and restraint; they ceased to be
instinctively inimical and wholly animal and
took common measures for the preservation
<span class="pageno" id="Page_133">133</span>and rationing of their heaven-sent windfall.
They advised, consulted, heard opinion and
gave it, were reasonable; counted their
numbers in relation to the size of their hoard;
and in the end decided, by common consent,
on the amount of the daily portion which was
to be allotted to each in return for his share
in the duty of guarding it—against the cravings
of their own hunger as well as against the
inroads of rats and mice.... With food—with
property—they were human again;
capable of plans for the morrow, of concerted
and intelligent action. The enmity they had
hitherto felt against each other was suddenly
transferred to the stranger—the foreigner—who
might force his way in and acquire a
share in their treasure. Hence they took
precautions against the arrival of the stranger,
kept watch and ward on the outskirts of the
town and drove away the chance newcomer,
so that the knowledge of their good fortune
should not spread. With duties shared, the
dead sense of comradeship revived; they
began to recognize and greet each other as
they came for their daily portion. And if
some were restrained only by the common
watchfulness from appropriating more than
their share of the common stock, there
<span class="pageno" id="Page_134">134</span>were others in whom stirred the sense of
honour.</p>
<p class="c006">For a week or more they lived under the
beginnings of a social system which was
rendered possible by their certainty of a
daily mess; and then came what, perhaps,
was inevitable—discovery of pilfering from
the store that gave life to them all. The
pilferers, detected by the night guard, fled on
the instant, well knowing that their sin
against the very existence of the little community
was a sin beyond hope of forgiveness;
they eluded pursuit in the darkness and by
morning had vanished from the neighbourhood.
For the time only; since they took
with them the knowledge of the hoarded grain
they had forfeited—a knowledge which was
power and a weapon to themselves, a danger
to those they had fled from. Two days later,
after nightfall, a skeleton rabble, armed with
knives, clubs and stones, was led into the
town by the renegades; and there was
fought out a fierce, elementary battle, a
struggle of starved men for the prize of life
itself.... From the first the case of the
defenders was hopeless; outnumbered and
taken by surprise, they were beaten in detail,
overwhelmed—and in less than five minutes
<span class="pageno" id="Page_135">135</span>the survivors were flying for their lives, the
darkness their only hope of safety.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Theodore Savage was of the remnant who
owed their lives to darkness and the speed
with which they fled. As he neared the outskirts
of the town and slackened, exhausted,
to draw breath, he heard the patter of running
steps behind him and for a moment believed
himself pursued—till a passing burst of moonlight
showed the runner as a woman, like
himself seeking safety in flight. A young
woman, with a sobbing open mouth, who
clutched at his arm and besought him not to
leave her to be killed—to save her, to get her
away!... He knew her by sight as he
knew all the members of the destitute little
community—a girl with a face once plump,
now hollowed, whom he had seen daily when
she came, in stupid wretchedness, to hold out
her bowl for her share of the common ration;
one of a squalid company of three or four
women who herded together—and whose habit
of instinctive fellowship was broken by the
sudden onslaught which had driven them
apart in flight.</p>
<p class="c006">“I don’t know where they’ve all gone,” she
wailed. “Don’t leave me—for Gawd’s saike
<span class="pageno" id="Page_136">136</span>don’t leave me.... Ow, whatever shall I
do?... I dunno where to go—for Gawd’s
sake....”</p>
<p class="c006">He would gladly have been rid of her
lamenting helplessness but she clung to him
in a panic that would not be gainsaid, as
fearful almost of the lonely dark ahead as of
the bloody brawl she had fled from.</p>
<p class="c006">“Hold your tongue,” he ordered as he
pulled her along. “Don’t make that noise
or they’ll hear us. And keep close to me—keep
in the shadow.”</p>
<p class="c006">She obeyed and stilled her sobbing to gasps
and whimpers—holding tightly to his arm
while he hurried her through by-streets to
the open country. He knew no more than
she where they were going when they left
the silent outskirts of the town behind them,
and, pressing against each other for warmth,
bent their heads to a January wind.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_137">137</span>
<h2 class="c004">X</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">That night for Theodore Savage was the
beginning of an odd partnership, a new phase
of his life uncivilized. The girl who had
clutched at him as the drowning clutch at
straws was destined to bear him company for
more than a winter’s night and a journey to
comparative safety; being by nature and
training of the type that clings, as a matter
of right, to whomsoever will fend for it, she
drifted after him instinctively. When she
woke in the morning in the shelter he had
found for her she looked round for him to
guide and, if possible, feed her—and awaited
his instructions passively.</p>
<p class="c006">One human being—so it did not threaten
him with violence—was no more to him than
another, and perhaps he hardly noticed that
when he rose and moved on she followed.
From that hour forth she was always at his
heels—complaining or too wretched to complain.
He would let her hang on his arm as
they trudged and shared his findings of food
<span class="pageno" id="Page_138">138</span>with her—because she had followed, was
there; and it was some time before he
realized that he had shouldered a responsibility
which had no intention of shifting
itself from his back.... When he realized
the fact he had already tacitly accepted
it; and for the first few weeks of their
existence in common he was too fiercely
occupied in the task of keeping them both
alive to consider or define his relationship
to the creature who whimpered and
stumbled at his heels and took scraps of
food from his hands. When, at last, he considered
it, the relationship was established on
both sides. She was his dependent, after the
fashion of a child or an accustomed dog; and
having learned to look to him for food, for
guidance and protection, she could be cast off
only by direct cruelty and the breaking of a
daily habit.</p>
<p class="c006">In the beginning that was all; she followed
because she did not know what else to do; he
led and they hungered together. For the
most part they were silent with the speechlessness
of misery, and it was days before he
even asked her name, weeks before he knew
more of her life in the past than was betrayed
by a Cockney accent. So long as existence
<span class="pageno" id="Page_139">139</span>was a craving and a fear, where nothing mattered
save hunger and the fending-off of
present death, the fact that she was a woman
meant no more to him than her dependence
and his own responsibility; thus her companionship
was no more than the bodily presence
of a human being whose needs were his own,
whose terrors and whose enemies were his.</p>
<p class="c006">They prowled and starved together through
the long bitterness of winter in a world
stripped bare of its last year’s harvest where
all hungry mouths strove to keep other mouths
at a distance; and time and again, when they
grubbed for food or sought to take shelter, they
were driven away with threats and with violence
by those who already held possession of
some tract of street or country. No claim to
ownership could stand against the claim of a
stronger, and one man, meeting them, would
avoid them, slink out of their way—because,
being two, they could strip him if the mood
should take them. And when they, in their
turn, sighted three or four figures in the distance,
they made haste to take another road.</p>
<p class="c006">Once, when a solitary wayfarer shrank from
them and scuttled to the cover of a ragged
patch of firwood, there came back to Theodore,
like a rushing mighty wind, the memory of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_140">140</span>his last days in London, the thought of his
journey down to York. The strange, glad
fellowship of the outbreak of war, the eagerness
to serve and be sacrificed; the friendliness
of strangers, the dear love of England,
the brotherhood!... The creature who scuttled
at his very sight would have been his
brother in those first days of splendid sacrifice!</p>
<p class="c006">“Lord God!” he said and laughed long and
uncontrollably; while the girl, Ada, stared in
open-mouthed bewilderment—then pulled at
his arm and began to cry, believing he was
going off his head.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">In their hunted and fugitive life their wanderings,
of necessity, were planless; they
drifted east or west, by this road or that, as
fear, the weather or the cravings of their
hunger prompted. They sought food, thought
food only and, as far as possible, avoided the
neighbourhood of those, their fellow-men, who
might try to share their meagre findings.
House-room, bare house-room, stood ready for
their taking in the country as well as in the
town; but wherever there was more than
house-room—food or the mere possibility of
food—the human wolf was at hand to dispute
it with his rivals. There was a time when a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_141">141</span>road, followed blindly, led them down to the
sea and the corpse of a pretentious little watering-place—where
stiff, blank terraces of ornate
brick and plaster stared out at the unbroken
sea-line; they found themselves shelter in a
bow-windowed villa that still bore the legend
“Ocean View: Apartments,” trudged along
the tide-mark in search of sand-crabs and
fished from an iron-legged pier. When a long
winter gale swept the pier with breakers and
put a stop to their fishing, they turned and
tramped inland again.... And there was
another time when they were the sole inhabitants
of a stretch of Welsh mining-village—they
knew it for Welsh by the street-names—where
they hunted their rats and grubbed for
roots in allotments already trampled over.
For very starvation they moved on again; and
later—how much later they could not remember—took
shelter, because they could go no
further, in a cottage on the outskirts of a moorland
hamlet, where they were almost at extremity
when a bitter spell of cold, at the end
of winter, sent them food in the shape of
frozen rooks and starlings. And, a day or
two later, they were driven out again; Theodore,
searching for dead birds in the snow, met
others engaged in the same hungry quest—other
<span class="pageno" id="Page_142">142</span>and earlier settlers in the neighbourhood
who saw in him a poacher on their scanty
hunting-grounds and, gathering together in a
common hate and need, fell on the intruders
and chased them out with stones and threats.
Theodore and the girl were hunted from their
homestead and out on to the bleakness of the
moor; whence, looking back breathless and
aching from their bruises, they saw half a
dozen yelling starvelings who still threatened
them with shouts and upraised fists....
They went on blindly because they dared not
stay; and that, for many days, was the last
they saw of mankind.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It must have been towards the end of
February or the beginning of March that they
ended their long goings to and fro and found
the refuge that, for many months, was to give
them hiding and sustenance. Since they had
been driven from their last shelter they had
sighted no enemy in the shape of a living man,
but the days that followed their flight had been
almost foodless; and in the end they had
come near to death from exposure on a stretch
of hill and heath-covered country where they
lost all sense of direction or even of desire.
There, without doubt, they would have left
<span class="pageno" id="Page_143">143</span>their bones if there had not already been a
promise of spring in the air; as it was, they
could hardly drag themselves along when
the moor dropped suddenly into a valley, a
wide strip of land once pasture, now bleak and
blackened from the passing of the poison-fire
which had seared it from end to end. Here
and there were charred mummies of men and
of animals, lying thickest round a farmhouse,
partly burned out; but beyond the burned
farmhouse was a stream that might yield them
fish; and with the warmth that was melting
the snow on the hilltops little shafts of green
life were piercing through the blackened soil.
Before dark, in what once had been a garden,
they scraped with their nails and their knives
and found food—worm-eaten roots that would
once have seemed unfit for cattle, that they
thrust into their mouths unwashed. They
sheltered for the night within the skeleton
walls of the farm; and when, with morning,
they crawled into the sun, the last patch of
snow had vanished from the hills and the tiny
shafts of green were more radiant against the
blackened soil.... The long curse and barrenness
of winter was over and Nature was
beginning anew her task of supporting her
children.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_144">144</span>From that day forward they lived isolated,
without sight or sound of men. Chance had
led them to a loneliness which was safety,
coupled with a bare possibility of supporting
life—by rooting in fields left derelict, by fishing
and the snaring of birds; but for all their isolation
it was long before they ceased to peer
for men on the horizon, to take careful precautions
against the coming of their own kind.
With the memory of savagery and violence
behind them, they looked round sharply at
an unaccustomed sound, kept preferably to
woods and shadow and moved furtively in open
country; and Theodore’s ultimate choice of a
dwelling-place was dictated chiefly by fear of
discovery and desire to remain unseen. What
he sought was not only a shelter, a roof-tree,
but a hiding-place which other men might
pass without notice; hence he settled at last
in a fold of the hills—in a copse of tall wood,
some four or five miles from their first halt,
where oaks and larches, bursting into bud,
denied the ruin that had come upon last year’s
world.... Theodore, setting foot in the
wood for the first time—seeking refuge, a
hiding-place to cower in—was suddenly in
presence of the green life unchanging, that
blessed and uplifted by its very indifference to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_145">145</span>the downfall and agony of man. The windflowers,
thrusting through brown leaves, were
as last year’s windflowers—a delicate endurance
that persisted.... He had entered a
world that had not altered since the days
when he lived as a man.</p>
<p class="c006">He explored his little wood with precaution,
creeping through it from end to end; and,
finding no more recent sign of human occupation
than a stack of sawn logs, their bark grey
with mould, he decided on the site of his camp
and refuge—a clearing near the stream that
babbled down the valley, but well hidden by
its thick belt of trees. The girl had followed
him—she dreaded being left alone of all
things—and assented with her customary
listlessness when he explained to her that the
bird-life and the stream would mean a food-supply
and that the logs, ready cut, could be
built into shelters from the weather; she was
a town-dweller, mentally as well as by habit
of body, whom the spring of the woods had no
power to rouse from her apathy.</p>
<p class="c006">There were empty cottages for the taking
lower down the valley and it was the fear of
the marauder alone that sent them to camp in
the wilderness, that kept them lurking in their
fold of the hills, not daring to seek for greater
<span class="pageno" id="Page_146">146</span>comfort. Within a day or two after they had
discovered it, they were hidden away in the
solitary copse, their camp, to begin with, no
more than a couple of small lean-to’s—logs
propped against the face of a projecting rock
and their interstices stuffed with green moss.
In the first few weeks of their lonely life they
were often near starvation; but with the
passing of time food was more abundant, not
only because Theodore grew more skilled in his
fishing and snaring—learned the haunts of
birds and the likely pools for fish—but because,
as spring ripened, they inherited in the waste
land around them a legacy of past cultivation,
fruits of the earth that had sown themselves
and were growing untended amidst weeds.</p>
<p class="c006">With time, with experiment and returning
strength, Theodore made their refuge more
habitable; tools, left lying in other men’s
houses, fields and gardens, were to be had for
the searching, and, when he had brought home
a spade discovered in a weed-patch and an axe
found rusting on a cottage floor, he built a clay
oven that their fire might not quench in the
rain and hewed wood for the bettering of their
shelters. Ada—when he told her where to
look for it—gathered moss and heather for
their bed-places and spread it to dry in the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_147">147</span>sun; and from one of his more distant expeditions
he returned with pots which served for
cooking and the carrying of water from the
stream.... Spring lengthened into summer
and no man came near them; they lived
only to themselves in a primitive existence
which concerned itself solely with food and
bodily security.</p>
<p class="c006">As the days grew longer and the means of
subsistence were easier to come by, Theodore
would go further afield—still moving cautiously
over open country, but no longer expectant
of onslaught. In the immediate neighbourhood
of his daily haunts and hunting-grounds
was no sign of human life and work
save a green cart-track that ended on the
outskirts of his copse; but lower down the
valley were ploughed fields lapsing into weed-beds,
here and there an orchard or a garden-patch
and hedges that straggled as they would.
Lower down again was another wide belt of
burned land which, so far, he had not entered—trees
on either side the stream, stood gaunt
and withered to the farthest limit of his sight.
The district, even when alive and flourishing,
had seemingly been sparsely populated; its
lonely dwellings were few and far apart—a
farmhouse here, a clump of small cottages
<span class="pageno" id="Page_148">148</span>there, all bearing traces of the customary
invasion by the hungry. Sheep-farming had
been one of the local industries, and hillsides
and fields were dotted with the skeletons of
sheep—left lying where vagabond hunger had
slaughtered them and ripped the flesh from
their bones.</p>
<p class="c006">As the year rolled over him, Theodore came
to know the earth as primitive man and the
savage know it—as the source of life, the storehouse
of uncertain food, the teacher of cunning
and an infinite and dogged patience. When
the weather made wandering or fishing impossible
he would sit under shelter, with his
hands on his knees, passive, unimpatient,
hardly moving through long hours, while he
waited for the rain to cease. It was months
before there stirred in him a desire for more
than safety and his daily bread, before he
thought of the humanity he had fled from
except with fear and a shrinking curiosity as
to what might be happening in the world beyond
his silent hills. In his body, exhausted
by starvation, was a mind exhausted and
benumbed; to which only very gradually—as
the quiet and healing of Nature worked on
him—the power of speculation and outside
interest returned. In the beginnings of his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_149">149</span>solitary life he still spoke little and thought
little save of what was personal and physical;
cut off mentally from the future as well as from
the past, he was content to be relieved of the
pressure of hunger and hidden from the enemy,
man.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_150">150</span>
<h2 class="c004">XI</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">Of the woman whom chance and her own
helplessness had thrown upon his hands he
knew, in those first months, curiously little.
She remained to him what she had been from
the moment she clutched at his arm and fled
with him—an encumbrance for which he was
responsible—and as the numbness passed from
his brain and he began once more to live mentally,
she entered less and less into his thoughts.
She was Ada Cartwright—as pronounced by
its owner he took the name at first for Ida—ex-factory
hand and dweller in the north-east
of London; once vulgarly harmless in the
company of like-minded gigglers, now stupefied
by months of fear and hunger, bewildered
and incapable in a life uncivilized that demanded
of all things resource. As she ate
more plentifully and lost her starved hollows,
she was not without comeliness of the vacant,
bouncing type; a comeliness hidden from
Theodore by her tousled hair, her tattered
garments and the heavy wretchedness that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_151">151</span>sulked in her eyes and turned down the corners
of her mouth. She was helpless in her new
surroundings, with the dazed helplessness of
those who have never lived alone or bereft
of the minor appliances of civilization; to
Theodore, at times, she seemed half-witted,
and he treated her perforce as a backward
child, to be supervised constantly lest it fail
in the simplest of tasks.</p>
<p class="c006">It was his well-meant efforts to renew her
scanty and disreputable wardrobe that first
revealed to him something of the mind that
worked behind her outward sullen apathy. In
the beginning of disaster clothing had been
less of a difficulty than the other necessities of
life; long after food was a treasure beyond
price it could often be had for the taking and,
when other means of obtaining it failed, those
who needed a garment would strip it from the
dead, who had no more need of it. In their
hidden solitude it was another matter, and
they were soon hard put to it to replace the
rags that hung about them; thus Theodore
accounted himself greatly fortunate when,
ransacking the rooms of an empty cottage, he
came on a cupboard with three or four
blankets which he proceeded to convert into
clothing by the simple process of cutting a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_152">152</span>hole in the middle. He returned to the camp
elated by his acquisition; but when he presented
Ada with her improvised cloak, the
girl astonished him by turning her head and
bursting into noisy tears.</p>
<p class="c006">“What’s the matter?” he asked her, bewildered.
“Don’t you like it?”</p>
<p class="c006">She made no answer but noisier tears, and
when he insisted that it would keep her nice
and warm her sobs rose to positive howls;
he stared at her uncertainly as she sat and
rocked, then knelt down beside her and
began to pat and soothe, as he might have
tried to soothe a child. In the end the
howls diminished in volume and he obtained
an explanation of the outburst—an explanation
given jerkily, through sniffs, and accompanied
by much rubbing of eyes.</p>
<p class="c006">No, it wasn’t that she didn’t want it—she
did want it—but it reminded her.... It
was so ’ard never to ’ave anything nice to
wear. Wasn’t she ever going to ’ave anything
nice to wear again—not ever, as long as
she lived?... She supposed she’d always
got to be like this! No ’airpins—and straw
tied round her feet instead of shoes!...
Made you look as if you’d got feet like elephants—and
she’d always been reckoned to
<span class="pageno" id="Page_153">153</span>’ave a small foot.... Made you wish you
was dead and buried!...</p>
<p class="c006">He tried two differing lines of consolation,
neither particularly successful; suggesting,
in the first place, that there was no one but
himself to see what she looked like, and, in the
second, that a blanket could be made quite
becoming as a garment.</p>
<p class="c006">“That’s a lie,” Ada told him sulkily. “You
know it ain’t becoming—’ow could it be? A
blanket with an ’ole for the ’ead!... Might
just as well ’ave no figure. Might just as well
be a sack of pertaters.... I wonder what
anyone would ’ave said at ’ome if I’d told ’em
I should ever be dressed in a blanket with an
’ole for the ’ead!... And I always ’ad
taiste in my clothes—everyone said I ’ad
taiste.”</p>
<p class="c006">And—stirred to the soul by the memory of
departed chiffon, by the hideous contrast between
present squalor and former Sunday best—her
howls once more increased in volume
and she blubbered with her head on her knee.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore gave up the attempt at consolation
as useless, leaving her to weep herself out
over vanished finery while he busied himself
with the cooking of their evening meal; and
in due time she came to the end of her stock
<span class="pageno" id="Page_154">154</span>of emotion, ceased to snuffle, ate her supper
and took possession of the blanket with the
’ole for the ’ead—which she wore without
further complaint. The incident was over and
closed; but it was not without its significance
in their common life. To Theodore the tragicomic
outburst was a reminder that his dependent,
for all her childish helplessness, was
a woman, not only a creature to be fed; while
the stirrings of Ada’s personal vanity were a
sign and token that she, also, was emerging
from the cowed stupor of body and mind produced
by long terror and starvation, that her
thoughts, like her companion’s, were turning
again to the human surroundings they had
fled from.... Man had ceased to be only an
enemy, and the first sheer relief at security
attained was mingling, in both of them, with
the desire to know what had come to a world
that still gave no sign of its existence. Order,
the beginnings of a social system (so Theodore
insisted to himself) must by now have risen
from the dust; but meanwhile—because order
restored gave no sign and the memory of humanity
debased was still vivid—he showed himself
with caution against the skyline and went
stealthily when he broke new ground. There
were days when he lay on a hill-top and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_155">155</span>scanned the clear horizon, for an hour at a
time, in the hope that a man would come in
sight; just as there were nights, many, when
he lived his past agonies over again and
started from his sleep, alert and trembling, lest
the footstep he had dreamed might be real.
Meanwhile he made no move towards the
world he had fled from—waiting till it gave
him a sign.</p>
<p class="c006">If he had been alone in his wilderness, unburdened
by the responsibility of Ada and
her livelihood, it is probable that, before the
days shortened, he would have embarked upon
a journey of cautious exploration; but there
was hazard in taking her, hazard in leaving her,
and their safety was still too new and precious
to be lightly risked for the sake of a curious
adventure—which might lead, with ill-luck, to
discovery of their secret place and the enforced
sharing of their hidden treasure of food.
Further, as summer drew on towards autumn,
though his haunting fear of mankind grew less,
his work in his own small corner of the earth
was incessant and, in preparation for the
coming of winter, he put thought of distant
expedition behind him and busied himself in
making their huts more weatherproof, as well
as roomier, in the storing of firewood under
<span class="pageno" id="Page_156">156</span>shelter from the damp, and in the gathering
together of a stock of food that would not rot.
He made frequent journeys—sometimes alone,
sometimes with Ada trudging behind him—to
a derelict orchard in the lower valley which
supplied them plentifully with apples; he had
provided himself with a wet-weather occupation
in the twisting of osiers into clumsy
baskets—which were filled in the orchard and
carried to their camping-place where they
spread out the apples on dried moss....
With summer and autumn they fared well
enough on the harvest of other men’s planting;
and if Theodore’s crude and ignorant
experiments in the storage of fruit and vegetables
were failures more often than not, there
remained sufficient of the bounty of harvest
to help them through the scarcity of winter.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It was with the breaking of the next spring
that there came a change into the life that he
lived with Ada.</p>
<p class="c006">They had dragged through the winter in a
squalid hardship that, but for the memory of
a hardship more dreadful, would have seemed
at times beyond bearing; often short of food,
with no means of light but their fire, with
damp and snow dripping through their ill-built
<span class="pageno" id="Page_157">157</span>shelters—where they learned, like animals,
to sleep through the long dark hours.
Through all the winter months their solitude
was still unbroken, and if any marauders
prowled in the neighbourhood, they passed
without knowledge of the hidden camp in the
hills.</p>
<p class="c006">It was—so far as he could guess—on one of
the first sunny days of March that Theodore,
the spring lust of movement stirring in his
blood, went further from the camp than he
had as yet explored; following the stream
down its valley into the wide belt of burned
land, now rank with coarse grass and yellow
dandelions. For an hour or so there was
nothing save coarse grass, yellow dandelion
and gaunt, dead trees; then a bend of the
stream showed him roofs—a cluster of them—and
instinctively he halted and crouched
behind a tree before making his stealthy
approach.</p>
<p class="c006">His stealth and precaution were needless.
The village from a distance might have passed
for uninjured—the flames that had blackened
its fields had swept by it, and the houses, for
the most part, stood whole; but there was no
living man in the long, straggling street, no
movement, save of birds and the pattering
<span class="pageno" id="Page_158">158</span>little scuffle of rats. The indifferent life of
beast and bird had taken possession of the
dwellings of those who once tyrannized over
them; and not only of their dwellings but
their bodies. At the entrance of the village
half-a-dozen skeletons lay sprawled on the
grass-grown road, and a robin sang jauntily
from his perch on the breast-bone of a man....
From one end of the street to the other
the bones of men lay scattered; in the road,
in gardens, on the thresholds of houses—some
with tattered rags still fluttering to the wind,
some bare bones only, whence the flesh had
festered and been gnawed. By a cottage
doorstep lay two skeletons touching each
other—whereof one was the framework of a
child; the little bones that had once been
arms reached out to the death’s-head that once
had borne the likeness of a woman....</p>
<p class="c006">There was a time when Theodore would
have turned from the sight and fled hastily;
even now, familiar though he was with the
ugliness of death, his flesh stirred and crept
in the presence of the grotesque litter of
bones.... These people had died suddenly,
in strange contorted attitudes—here crouching,
there outstretched with clawing fingers.
Gas, he supposed—a cloud of gas rolling down
<span class="pageno" id="Page_159">159</span>the street before the wind—and perhaps not
a soul left alive!... From an upper window
hung a long, fleshless arm: someone had
thrust up the casement for air and fallen half
across the sill.</p>
<p class="c006">It was the indifferent, busy chirping of the
nesting birds that helped him to the courage to
explore the silent street to its end. It wound,
through the village and out of it, to a bridge
across a river—into which flowed the smaller
stream he had followed since he left his refuge
in the hills. From the bridge the road turned
with the river and ran down the valley in a
south to south-easterly direction; a road
grass-grown and empty and bearing no recent
trace of the life of man—nothing more recent
than the remains of a cart, blackened wood
and rusted metal, with the bones of a horse
between its shafts.</p>
<p class="c006">Below the dead village the valley opened
out, the hills receded and were lower; but
between them, so far as his eye could discern,
the trees were still blackened and lifeless.
Down either side the stream the fire-blast
had swept without mercy; and, from the
completeness with which the country had been
seared, Theodore judged that it had been
largely cornland, waving with ripe stalks at
<span class="pageno" id="Page_160">160</span>the moment of disaster and fired after days of
dry weather.... All life, save the life of man,
teemed in the hot March sun; the herbage
thrust bravely to obliterate his handiwork,
larks shrilled invisibly and lithe, dark fish
were darting through the arches of the bridge.</p>
<p class="c006">He went only a yard or two beyond the end
of the bridge—having, as the sun warned him,
reached the limit of distance he could well
accomplish if he was to return to the camp by
nightfall. On his way back through the village
he fought with his repugnance to the
grinning company of the dead and turned into
one of the silent houses that stood open for
any man to enter. Though the dead still
dwelt there—stricken down, on the day of
disaster before they could reach the open air—there
were the usual abundant traces that
living men had been there before him; the
door had been forced and rooms littered and
fouled in the frequent search for clothing and
food. All the same, in the hugger-mugger on
a kitchen floor he found treasure of string and
stuffed the blanket-bag slung over his back
with odds and ends of rusting hardware;
finally mounting to the floor above the kitchen
where, at the head of the staircase, an open
door faced him and beyond it a chest of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_161">161</span>drawers. The drawers had been pulled out
and emptied on the floor; what remained of
their contents was a dirty litter, sodden by
rain when it drove through the window and
browned with the dust of many months, and it
was not until Theodore had picked up a handful
of the litter that he saw it was composed of
women’s trifles of underwear. What he held
was a flimsy bodice made of soiled and faded
lawn with a narrow little edging of lace.</p>
<p class="c006">He dropped it, only to pick it up again —
remembering suddenly the blanket episode and
Ada’s lamentable howls for the garments a
wilderness denied her. Perhaps an assortment
of dingy finery would do something to
allay her craving—and, amused at the thought,
he went down on a knee and proceeded to
collect an armful. Appropriately the shifting
of a heap of yellowed rags revealed a broken
hand-glass, lying face downwards on the floor;
as he raised it, wondering what Ada would say
to a mirror as a gift, its cracked surface
showed him a bedstead behind him—not
empty!... What was left of the owner of
the scraps of lawn and lace was reflected from
the oval of the glass.</p>
<p class="c006">He snatched up his bag and clattered down
the stairs into the open.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_162">162</span>
<h2 class="c004">XII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">It was well past dusk when he trudged up
the path that led to the camp and found Ada
on the watch at the outskirts of the copse,
uneasy at the thought of dark alone.</p>
<p class="c006">“You ’ave been a time,” she reproached
him sulkily. “The ’ole blessed day—since
breakfus. I was beginnin’ to think you’d
gone and got lost and I’ve ’ad the fair ’ump
sittin’ ’ere by myself and listenin’ to them
owls. I ’ate their beastly screechin’; it gives
me the creeps.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Never mind,” he consoled her, “come
along to the fire. I’ve brought you something—a
present.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Pertaters?” Ada conjectured, still sulky.</p>
<p class="c006">“Not potatoes this time,” he told her.
“Better than vegetables—something to
wear.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Something to wear,” she repeated, with
no show of enthusiasm. “I suppose that’s
another old blanket!”</p>
<p class="c006">“Wrong again,” he rejoined, amused by
<span class="pageno" id="Page_163">163</span>the contempt in her voice. She was still contemptuous
when he opened his bag and tossed
her a dingy bundle; but as she disentangled
it, saw lace and embroidery, she brightened
suddenly and knelt down to examine in the
firelight; while the sight of the cracked
hand-glass brought an instant “Oh!” followed
by intent contemplation and much
patting and twisting of hair.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore dished supper while she sat and
pondered her reflection; and even while she
ate hungrily she had eyes and thoughts for
nothing but her new possessions. Some were
what he had taken them to be—underclothes,
for the most part of an ordinary pattern; but
mingled with the plainer linen articles were
one or two more decorative, lace collars and
the like, and it was on these, dingy as they
were, that she fell with delight that was open
and audible. He watched her curiously when,
for the first time since he had known her, he
saw her mouth widen in a smile. She was
no longer inert, the sullen, lumpish Ada, she
was critical, interested, alive; she fingered
her treasures, she smoothed them and made
guesses at their price when new; she held
them up, now this way, now that, for his
admiration and her own. Finally, while
<span class="pageno" id="Page_164">164</span>Theodore stretched his tired length by the
camp fire, she ran off to her shelter for a
broken scrap of comb; and when he looked
up, a few minutes later, she was posing
self-consciously before the hand-glass, with
hair newly twisted and a dirty scrap of lace
round her neck.... She was another woman
as she sat with her rags arranged to show her
new frippery; tilting the hand-mirror this
way and that and twitching now at the collar
and now at her straying ends of hair.</p>
<p class="c006">Lying stretched on an arm by the fire, he
watched her little feminine antics, amused and
taken out of himself; realizing how seldom,
till that moment, he had thought of her as a
woman, how nearly she had seemed to him an
animal only, a creature to be guided and fed;
and parrying her eager and insistent demand
to be taken to the house where the treasure
had been found, that she might see if it contained
any more. He had no desire to spoil
her pleasure in her finery by the gruesome tale
of the manner of its finding; hence, in spite of
a curiosity made manifest in coaxing, he held
to his refusal stubbornly.... The house
was a long way off, he told her—much further
than she would care to tramp; then, as she
still persisted, maintaining her readiness even
<span class="pageno" id="Page_165">165</span>for a lengthy expedition, he went on to fiction
and explained that the house was in a dangerous
condition—knocked about, ruinous, might
fall at any moment—and he was not going to
say where it was, for her own sake, lest she
should be tempted to the peril of an entry.</p>
<p class="c006">She pouted “You might tell me,” glancing
at him from under her lashes; then, as he
still persisted in refusal, slapped him on the
shoulder for an obstinate boy, turned her back
and pretended to sulk. He returned the slap—she
expected it and giggled; the next move
in the game was his catching of her wrist as
she raised her hand for a rejoinder—and for a
moment they wrestled inanely, after the fashion
of Hampstead Heath.... As he let her go,
it dawned on him that this was flirtation as
she knew it.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It did not take long for him to realize that
they stood to each other, from that night on,
in a new and more difficult relation; from
foundling and guardian, the leader and led,
they had developed into woman and man.
For a time fear and hunger had suppressed in
Ada the consciousness of sex—which a yard
or two of lace and the possession of a hand-glass
had revived. Once revived, it coloured
<span class="pageno" id="Page_166">166</span>her every action, gave meaning to her every
word and glance; so that, day by day and
hour by hour, the man who dwelt beside her
was reminded of bodily desire.</p>
<p class="c006">One night when she had left him he lay
staring at the fire, faced the situation and
wondered if she saw where she was drifting?
Possibly—possibly not; she was acting instinctively,
from habit. To her (he was sure)
a man was a creature to flirt with; an unsubtle
attempt to arouse his desire was the
only way she knew of carrying on a conversation....
Now that she was woman again—not
merely bewildered misery and empty
stomach—she had slipped back inevitably to
the little giggling allurements of her factory
days, to the habits bred in her bone.... With
the result?... He put the thought from
him, turned over, dog-weary, and slept.</p>
<p class="c006">So soon as the next night he saw the result
as inevitable; the outcome of life reduced
to mere animal living, of nearness, isolation
and the daily consciousness of sex. If they
stayed together—and how should they not
stay together?—it was only a question of
time, of weeks at the furthest, of days or it
might be hours.... He raised himself to
peer through the night at the log-hut that hid
<span class="pageno" id="Page_167">167</span>and sheltered Ada, wondering if she also were
awake. If so, of a certainty, her thoughts were
of him; and perhaps she knew likewise that it
was only a question of time. Perhaps—and
perhaps she just drifted, following her instincts....
He found himself wondering what she
would say if she opened her eyes to find him
standing at the entrance to her hut, to see him
bending over her ... now?</p>
<p class="c006">He put the thought from him and once more
turned over and slept.</p>
<p class="c006">With the morning it seemed further off,
less inevitable; the sun was hidden behind
raw grey mist, and when Ada, shivering and
stupid, turned out into the chilly discomfort
of the weather she was too much depressed
for the exercise of feminine coquetry. The
day’s work—hard necessary wood-chopping
and equally necessary fishing for the larder—sent
his thoughts into other channels, and it
was not till he sat at their evening fire—warmed,
fed and rested, with no duties to
distract him—that he became conscious again,
and even more strongly, of the change in their
attitude and intercourse. Something new,
of expectation, had crept into it; something
of excitement and constraint. When their
hands touched by chance they noticed it, were
<span class="pageno" id="Page_168">168</span>instantly awkward; when a silence fell Ada
was embarrassed, uncomfortable and made
palpable efforts to break it with her pointless
giggle. When their eyes met, hers dropped
and looked away.... When she rose at last
and said good-night he was sure that she also
knew. And since they both knew and the end
was inevitable, certain....</p>
<p class="c006">“You’re not going yet,” he said—and
caught at her wrist, laughing oddly.</p>
<p class="c006">“It’s late—and I’m sleepy,” she objected
with a foolish little giggle; but made no effort
to withdraw her wrist from his hold.</p>
<p class="c006">“Nonsense,” he told her, “it’s early yet—and
you’re better by the fire. Sit down and
keep me company for a bit longer.”</p>
<p class="c006">She giggled again—more faintly, more nervously—as
she yielded to the pull of his fingers
and sat down; offering no protest when, instead
of releasing her arm, he drew it through
his own and held it pressed to his side.... It
was a windless night, very silent; no sound
but the rush of the little stream below them,
now and then a bird-cry and the snap and
crackle of their fire. Once or twice Ada tried
talking—of a hooting owl, of a buzzing insect—for
the sake, obviously, of talking, of hearing
a voice through the silence; but as he answered
<span class="pageno" id="Page_169">169</span>not at all, or by monosyllables, her
forced little chatter died away. Even if the
thought was not conscious, he knew she was
his for the taking.</p>
<p class="c006">With her arm in his—with her body pressed
close enough to feel her quickened breathing—he
sat and stared into the fire; and at the last,
when the inevitable was about to accomplish
itself, there floated into his mental vision the
delicate memory of the woman whom once he
had desired. Phillida, a shadow impossible,
leaned out of a vanished existence as the
Damosel leaned out of Heaven; and he looked
with his civilized, his artist’s eyes on the woman
who was his for the taking.... Ada felt
that he slackened his hold on her arm, felt
him shrink a little from the pressure of her
leaning shoulder.</p>
<p class="c006">“What is it?” she asked—uneasy; and
perhaps it was the sound of her familiar voice
that brought him back to primitive realities.
The glow of the fire and the over-arching vault
of darkness; and beneath it two creatures,
male and female, alone with nature, subject
only to the laws of her instinct.... The
vision of a dead world, a dead woman, faded
and he looked no more through the fastidious
eyes of the civilized.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_170">170</span>Man civilized is various, divided from his
kind by many barriers—of taste, of speech, of
habit of mind and breeding; man living as
the brute is cut to one pattern, the pattern
of his simple needs and lusts.... The warm
shoulder pressed him and he drew it the closer;
he was man in a world of much labour and
instinct—who sweated through the seasons
and wearied. Whose pains were of the body,
whose pleasures of the body ... and alone
in the night with a mate.</p>
<p class="c006">“’Ere, what’s that for?” she asked, making
semblance of protest, as his hand went round
her head and he pressed her cheek against
his lips.</p>
<p class="c006">He said “You!” ... and laughed oddly
again.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_171">171</span>
<h2 class="c004">XIII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">They settled down swiftly and prosaically
into a married state which entailed no immediate
alteration—save one—in life as they had
hitherto shared it. Matrimony shorn of rings
and a previous engagement, shorn of ceremony,
honeymoon, change of residence and
comments of friends, revealed itself as a
curiously simple undertaking and, by its very
simplicity, disappointing—so far at least as
Ada was concerned.</p>
<p class="c006">Her conscience, in the matter of legal and
religious observance, was not unduly tender,
and her embryo scruples concerning the
absence of legal or religious sanction to their
union were easily allayed by her husband’s
assurance that they were as truly married as
it was possible to be in a world without
churches or registrars. What she missed far
more than certificate or blessing was the paraphernalia
and accompanying circumstance of
the wedding, to which she had always looked
forward as the culminating point of her existence;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_172">172</span>her veil, her bouquet, her bevy of
bridesmaids, her importance!... When she
sat with her back against a tree-trunk, listlessly
unobservant of the play of dappled
sunlight or the tracery of leafage, she would
crave in the shallows of her disappointed heart
for the gaudy little sitting-room that should
have been her newly-married dwelling; contrasting
its impossible and non-existent splendours
with the ramshackle roof-tree under
which she took shelter from the weather. The
gaudy, tasteless, stuffy little room wherein
she should have set out her wedding presents,
displayed her photos and done honours of
possession to her friends.... That was
matrimony as she understood it; enhanced
importance, display of her matronly dignity.
And instead, a marriage that aroused no envy,
called forth no jests, affected none but the
partners to the bond; in the unchanged discomfort
of unchanged surroundings—wherein,
being crowd-bred, she could see little beauty
and no meaning; in the frequent loneliness
and silence abhorrent to her noise-loving soul;
with the evening companionship of a wearied
man to whom her wifehood meant no more
than a physical relation.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore, being male, was not troubled by
<span class="pageno" id="Page_173">173</span>her abstract longings for the minor dignities
of matrimony—and, expecting little from his
married life, it could not bring him disillusion.
Ada might have fancied that what stirred in
her was love; he had always known himself
moved by a physical instinct only. Thus of
the pair he was the less to be pitied when the
increased familiarity of their life in common
brought its necessary trouble in the shape of
friction—revealing the extent of their unlikeness
and even, with time, their antagonism.
One of the results of her vague but ever-present
sense of grievance, her lasting homesickness
for a world that had crumbled, was a
lack of interest in the world as it was and a
reluctance to adapt herself to an environment
altogether hateful; hence, on Theodore’s
side, a justified annoyance at her continued
want of resource and the burdensome stupidity
which threw extra labour on himself.</p>
<p class="c006">She was a thoroughly helpless woman;
helpless after the fashion of the town-bred
specialist, the product of division of labour.
The country, to her, was a district to drive
through in a <span lang="fr">char-à-banc</span> with convenient
halts at public-houses. Having lived all her
days as the member of a crowd, she was a
creature incomplete and undeveloped; she
<span class="pageno" id="Page_174">174</span>had schooled with a crowd and worked with it,
shared its noise and its ready-made pleasures;
it is possible that, till red ruin came, she had
conceived of no other existence.... Leaving
school, she had entered a string factory
where she pocketed a fairly comfortable wage
in return for the daily and yearly manipulation
of a machine devoted to the production
of a finer variety of twine. Having learned to
handle the machine with ease, life had no more
to offer her in the way of education, and development
came to a standstill. Her meals, for
the most part, she obtained without trouble
from factory canteens, cheap restaurants or
municipal kitchens; thus her domestic duties
were few—the daily smearing of a bedroom
(frequently omitted) and the occasional cobbling
of a garment, bought ready-made. Her
reading, since her schooldays, had consisted
of novelettes only, and even to these she was
not greatly addicted, preferring, as a rule, a
more companionable form of amusement—a
party to the pictures, gossip with her girlfriends
and flirtations more or less open. At
twenty-three (when disaster came) she was
a buxom, useless and noisy young woman—good-natured,
with the brain of a hen; incapable
alike of boiling a potato or feeling an
<span class="pageno" id="Page_175">175</span>interest in any subject that did not concern
her directly.</p>
<p class="c006">There were moments when she irritated
Theodore intensely by her infantile helplessness
and the blunders that resulted therefrom,
by her owlish stupidity in the face of the new
and unfamiliar. And there were moments
when, for that very owlishness, he pitied her
with equal intensity, realizing that his own
loss, his daily wretchedness, was a small thing
indeed beside hers. The ruin of a world could
not rob him utterly of his heritage of all the
ages; part of that heritage no ruin could touch,
since he had treasure stored in his heart and
brain for so long as his memory should last.
But for Ada, whose world had been a world of
cheap finery, of giggling gossip and evenings
at the cinema, there remained from the ages—nothing.
Gossip and cinemas, flowered
hats and ribbon-trimmed camisoles—they had
left not a wrack, save regret, for her mind to
feed on.... As the workings of her vacant
little soul were laid bare to him, he understood
how dreadful was its plight; how pitiably
complete must be the blankness of a life such
as hers, bereft of the daily little personal
interests wherein had been summed up a
world. She—unhandy, unresourceful, superficial—was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_176">176</span>one of the natural and inevitable
products of a mechanical civilization; which,
in saving her trouble, had stunted her, interposing
itself between primary cause and effect.
Bread, to her, was food bought at a counter—not
grown with labour in a field; the result
not of rain, sun and furrow, but of sixpence
handed to a tradesman. And cunning men
of science had wrestled with the forces of
nature that she might drop a penny in the
slot for warmth or suck sweets with her
“boy” at the pictures.</p>
<p class="c006">He guessed her a creature who had always
lived noisily, a babbler whom even his fits of
taciturnity would not have daunted had she
found much to babble of in the lonely world
she shared with him; but, bewildered and
awed by it, oppressed by its silence, she found
meagre subject-matter for the very small talk
which was her only method of expression.
Under the peace and vastness of the open sky
she was homesick for a life that excluded all
vastness and peace; her sorrow’s crown of
sorrow was a helpless, incessant craving for
little meaningless noises and little personal
excitements.... Sometimes, at night, as they
sat by the fire, he would see her face pathetic in
its blank dreariness; her eyes wandering from
<span class="pageno" id="Page_177">177</span>the glow of the fire to the darkness beyond it
and back from the darkness to the glow.
Endeavouring—(or so he imagined)—to piece
together some form of inner life from fragmentary
memories of past inanity and aimless,
ephemeral happenings!</p>
<p class="c006">The sight often moved him to pity; but he
cast about in vain for a means of allaying her
sodden and persistent discontent. Once or
twice he attempted to awaken her interest by
explaining, as he would have explained to a
child, the movements of nightly familiar stars,
the habits of birds or the process of growth in
vegetation. These things, as he took care to
point out, now concerned her directly, were
part of the round of her existence; but the
fact had no power to stimulate a mind which
had been accustomed to accept, without interest
or inquiry, the marvels of mechanical
science. She carried over into her new life the
same lack of curiosity which had characterized
her dealings with the old; she was no more
alive to the present phenomena of the open
field than to the past phenomena of the electric
switch, the petrol-engine or the gas-meter....
And the workings of the gas-meter at
least had been pleasant—while the workings
of raw nature repelled her. Thus Theodore’s
<span class="pageno" id="Page_178">178</span>only reward for his attempt at education was
a bored, inattentive remark, to the effect that
she had heard her teacher say something like
that at school.</p>
<p class="c006">She had all the crowd-liver’s horror of her
own company; strengthened, in her case, by
dislike of her surroundings, amounting to abhorrence,
and the abiding nervousness that
was a natural after-effect of the days when she
had fled from her fellows and cowered to the
earth in an abject and animal terror. Her unwillingness
to let Theodore out of her sight
was comprehensible enough, if irritating; but
there were times when it was more than irritating—a
difficulty added to life. It was impossible
to apportion satisfactorily a daily
toil that, if Ada had her way, must always be
performed in company; while her customary
fellowship on his hunting and snaring expeditions
meant not only the presence of a
clumsy idler but the dying down of a neglected
log-fire and the postponement of all
preparations for a meal until after their
return to camp. Further, it was a bar to that
wider exploration of the neighbourhood which,
as time went on, he desired increasingly;  confining
him, except on comparatively rare
occasions, to such range from his hearthstone
<span class="pageno" id="Page_179">179</span>as could be attained in the company of Ada.
So long as he attributed it to the workings of
fear only, he was hopeful that, with time, her
abhorrence of loneliness might pass; but as
the months went by he realized that it was not
only fear that kept her close to his heels—her
town-bred incapacity to interest or occupy
herself.</p>
<p class="c006">Once—when the call of the outside world
grew louder—he proposed to Ada that he
should see her well provided with a store of
food and fuel and leave her for two or three
days; hoping to tempt her to agreement by
pointing out the probability, amounting to
certainty, that other survivors of disaster must
be dwelling somewhere within reach. Peaceable
survivors with whom they could join
forces with advantage.... Her face lit up
for a moment at the idea of other men’s company;
but when she understood that he proposed
to go alone, her terror at the idea of
being left was abject and manifest. She was
afraid of everything and anything; of ghosts,
of darkness, of prowling men, of spiders and
possible snakes; and, having reasoned in
vain, in the end he gave her the assurance she
clamoured for—that she should not be called
on to suffer the agony of a night by herself.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_180">180</span>He gave her the promise in sheer pity, but
regretted it as soon as made. He had set his
heart on a journey in search of the world that
gave no sign, planning to undertake it before
the days grew shorter; but he did not disguise
from himself that there might still be
danger in the expedition—which Ada’s hampering
presence would increase. The project
was abandoned for the time being, in the hope
that she would see reason later; but he regretted
his promise and weakness the more
when he found that Ada did not trust to his
word and, fearing lest he gave her the slip,
now clung to him as closely as his shadow.
Her suspicion and stupidity annoyed him;
and there were times when he was ashamed of
his own irritation when he saw her trotting,
like a dog, at his heels or squatting within
eyeshot of his movements. He was conscious
of a longing to slap her silly face, and more
than once he spoke sharply to her, urged her
to go home; whereupon she sulked or cried,
but continued her trotting and squatting.</p>
<p class="c006">The irritation came to a head one afternoon
in the early days of autumn when, with persistent
ill-luck, he had been fishing a mile or
so from home. Various causes combined to
bring about the actual outbreak; a growing
<span class="pageno" id="Page_181">181</span>anxiety with regard to the winter supply of
provisions, sharpened by the discovery, the
night before, that a considerable proportion
of his store of vegetables was a failure and
already malodorous; the ill-success of several
hours’ fishing, and gusty, unpleasant weather
that chilled him as he huddled by the water.
The weather worsened after midday, the
gusts bringing rain in their wake; a cold
slanting shower that sent him, in all haste, to
the clump of trees where Ada had sheltered
since the morning. The sight of her sitting
there to keep an eye on him—uselessly watchful
and shivering to no purpose—annoyed him
suddenly and violently; he turned on her
sharply, as the shower passed, and bade her
go home on the instant. She was to keep a
good fire, a blazing fire—he would be drenched
and chilled by the evening. She was to have
water boiling that the meal might be cooked
the moment he returned with the wherewithal....
While he spoke she eyed him with
questioning, distrustful sullenness; then,
convinced that he meant what he said,
half rose—only, after a moment of further
hesitation, to slide down to her former
position with her back against the trunk of
a beech-tree.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_182">182</span>“I don’t want to,” she said doggedly. “I
want to stay ’ere. I don’t see why I shouldn’t.
What d’yer want to get rid of me for?”</p>
<p class="c006">The suspicion that lay at the back of the
refusal infuriated him: it was suddenly intolerable
to be followed and spied on, and he
lost his temper badly. The rough-tongued
vehemence of his anger surprised himself as
much as it frightened his wife; he swore at
her, threatened to duck her in the stream, and
poured out his grievances abusively. What
good was she?—a clog on him, who could not
even tend a fire, a helpless idiot who had to be
waited on, a butter-fingered idler without
brains! Let her do what he told her and
make herself of use, unless she wanted to be
turned out to fend for herself.... Much of
what he said was justified, but it was put
savagely and coarsely; and when—cowed,
perhaps, by the suggestion of a ducking—Ada
had taken to her heels in tears, he was remorseful
as well as surprised at his own vehemence.
He had not known himself as a man who could
rail brutally and use threats to a woman; the
revelation of his new possibilities troubled
him; and when, towards sundown, he gathered
up his meagre prey and stepped out
homeward, it was with the full intention of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_183">183</span>making amends to Ada for the roughness of
his recent outburst.</p>
<p class="c006">His path took him through a copse of brushwood
into what had been a cart-track; now
grass-grown and crumbling between hedges
that straggled and encroached. The wind,
rising steadily, was sweeping ragged clouds
before it and as he emerged from the shelter
of the copse he was met by a stinging rain.
He bent his head to it, in shivering discomfort,
thrusting chilled hands under his cloak for
warmth and longing for the blaze and the
good warm meal that should thaw them; he
had left the copse a good minute behind him
when, from the further side of the overgrown
hedge, he heard sudden rending of brambles,
a thud, and a human cry. A yard or two on
was a gap in the hedge where a gate still
swung on its hinges; he rushed to it, quivering
at the thought of possibilities—and found
Ada struggling to her knees!</p>
<p class="c006">She began to cry loudly when she saw him,
like a child caught in flagrant transgression;
protesting, with bawling and angry tears,
that “she wasn’t going to be ordered about”
and “she should staiy just where she liked!”
It did not take him long to gather that her
previous flight had been a semblance only and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_184">184</span>that, shivering and haunted by ridiculous
suspicion, she had watched him all the afternoon
from behind the screen of the copse wood—for
company partly, but chiefly to make
sure he was there. Seeing him gather up his
tackle and depart homeward, she had tried
to outpace him unseen; keeping the hedge
between them as she ran and hoping to avert
a second explosion of his wrath by blowing
up the ashes of the fire before his arrival at
the camp. An unsuspected rabbit-burrow
had tripped her hurrying feet and brought
about disaster and discovery; and she made
unskilful efforts to turn the misfortune to
account by rubbing her leg and complaining
of damage sustained.</p>
<p class="c006">In contact with her stubborn folly his
repentance and kindly resolutions were forgotten;
he cut short her bid for sympathy
with a curt “Get along with you,” caught
her by the arm and started her with a push
along the road—too angry to notice that, for
the first time, he had handled her with actual
violence. Then, bending his head to the sweep
of the rain, he strode on, leaving her to follow
as she would.</p>
<p class="c006">Perhaps her leg really pained her, perhaps
she judged it best to keep her distance from
<span class="pageno" id="Page_185">185</span>his wrath; at any rate she was a hundred
yards or more behind him when he reached
the camp and, stirring the ashes that should
have been a fire, found only a flicker alive.
He cursed Ada’s idiocy between his chattering
teeth as he set to work to re-kindle the fire;
his hands shaking, half from anger, half from
cold, as he gathered the fuel together. When,
after a long interval of coaxing and cursing,
the flame quivered up into the twilight, it
showed him Ada sitting humped at the
entrance to their shelter; and at sight of her,
inert and watching him—watching him!—his
wrath flared sudden and furious.</p>
<p class="c006">“Have you filled the cookpot?” he asked,
standing over her. “No?... Then what
were you doing—sitting there staring while I
worked?”</p>
<p class="c006">She began to whimper, “You’re crool to
me!”—and repeated her parrot-like burden
of futile suspicion and grievance; that she
knew he wanted to get her out of the way so
as he could leave her, and she couldn’t be left
alone for the night! He had a sense of being
smothered by her foolish, invertebrate persistence,
and as he caught her by the shoulders
he trembled and sputtered with rage.</p>
<p class="c006">“God in Heaven, what’s the good of talking
<span class="pageno" id="Page_186">186</span>to you? If you take me for a liar, you take
me—that’s all. Do you think I care a curse
for your opinion?... But one thing’s certain—you’ll
do what I tell you, and you’ll
work. Work, do you hear?—not sit in a
lump and idle and stare while I wait on you!
Learn to use your silly hands, not expect me
to light the fire and feed you. And you’ll
obey, I tell you—you’ll do what you’re told.
If not—I’ll teach you....”</p>
<p class="c006">He was wearied, thwarted, wet through and
unfed since the morning; baulked of fire and
a meal by the folly that had irked him for
days; a man living primitively, in contact
with nature and brought face to face with the
workings of the law of the strongest. It
chanced that she had lumped herself down by
the bundle of osier-rods he had laid together
for his basket-making; so that when he
gripped her by the nape of the neck a weapon
lay ready to his hand. He used it effectively,
while she wriggled, plunged and howled;
there was nothing of the Spartan in her temperament,
and each swooping stroke produced
a yell. He counted a dozen and then dropped
her, leaving her to rub and bemoan her smarts
while he filled the cookpot at the stream.</p>
<p class="c006">When he came back with the cookpot filled,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_187">187</span>her noisy blubbering had died into gulps and
snuffles. The heat of his anger was likewise
over, having worked itself off by the mere act
of chastisement, and with its cooling he was
conscious of a certain embarrassment. If he
did not repent he was at least uneasy—not
sure how to treat her and speak to her—and he
covered his uneasiness, as best he might, by a
busy scraping and cleaning of fish and a noisy
snapping of firewood.... A wiser woman
might have guessed his embarrassment from
his bearing and movements and known how
to wrest an advantage by transforming it into
remorse; Ada, sitting huddled and smarting
on her moss-bed, found no more effective protest
against ill-treatment than a series of unbecoming
sniffs. With every silent moment
his position grew stronger, hers weaker; unconsciously
he sensed her acquiescence in the
new and brutal relation, and when—over his
shoulder—he bade her “Come along, if you
want any supper,” he knew, without looking,
that she would come at his word, take the
food that he gave her and eat.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">They discussed the subject once and very
briefly—at the latter end of a meal consumed
in silence. A full stomach gives courage and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_188">188</span>confidence; and Ada, having supped and
been heartened, tried a sulky “You’ve been
very crool to me.”</p>
<p class="c006">In answer, she was told, “You deserved it.”</p>
<p class="c006">After this unpromising beginning it took
her two or three minutes to decide on her next
observation.</p>
<p class="c006">“I believe,” she quavered tearfully, “you’ve
taken the skin off my back.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Nonsense!” he said curtly. Which was
true.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">The episode marked his acceptance of a new
standard, his definite abandonment of the code
of civilization in dealings between woman and
man. With another wife than Ada the lapse
into primitive relations would have been less
swift and certainly far less complete; she was
so plainly his mental inferior, so plainly
amenable to the argument of force and no
other, that she facilitated his conversion to the
barbaric doctrine of marriage. And his conversion
was the more thorough and lasting
from the success of his uncivilized methods of
ruling a household; where reasoning and
kindliness had failed of their purpose, the
sting of the rod had worked wonders....
Ada sulked through the evening and sniffed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_189">189</span>herself to sleep; but in the morning, when he
woke, she had filled the cookpot and was
busied at the breakfast fire.</p>
<p class="c006">They had adapted themselves to their
environment, the environment of primitive
humanity. That morning when he started
for his snaring he started alone; Ada stayed,
without remonstrance, to dry moss, collect
firewood and perform the small duties of the
camp.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_190">190</span>
<h2 class="c004">XIV</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">It was a solid fact that from the day of her
subjection to the rod and rule of her overlord,
Ada found life more bearable; and watching
her, at first in puzzlement, Theodore came by
degrees to understand the reason for the
change in her which was induced—so it
seemed—by the threat and magic of an osier-wand.
In the end he realized that the fundamental
cause of her sodden, stupid wretchedness
had been lack of effective interest—and
that in finding an interest, however humble,
she had found herself a place in the world.
Her interest, in the beginning, was nothing
more exalted than the will to avoid a second
switching; but, undignified as it was in its
origin, it implied a stimulus to action which
had hitherto been wanting, and a process of
adaptation to the new relationship between
herself and her man. By accepting him as
master, with the right unquestioned of reward
and punishment, she had provided herself with
<span class="pageno" id="Page_191">191</span>that object in life to which she had been unable
to attain by the light of her own mentality.</p>
<p class="c006">With an eye on the osier-heap she worked
that she might please and, finding occupation,
brooded less; learning imperceptibly to look
on the new world primitive as a reality whose
hardships could be mitigated by effort, instead
of an impossible nightmare. As she wrestled
with present difficulties—the daily tasks she
dared no longer neglect—the trams, shop-windows
and chiffons of the past receded on
her mental horizon. Not, fundamentally,
that they were any less dear to her; but the
need of placating an overlord at hand took up
part of her thoughts and time. Too slothful,
both in mind and in body, to acquire of her
own intelligence and initiative the changed
habits demanded by her changed surroundings,
she was unconsciously relieved—because instantly
more comfortable—when the necessary
habits were forced on her.</p>
<p class="c006">With the allotment of her duties and the
tacit definition of her status that followed on
the night of her chastisement, their life on the
whole became easier, better regulated; and
the mere fact of their frequent separation
during part of the day made their coming
together more pleasant. Companionship in
<span class="pageno" id="Page_192">192</span>any but the material sense it was out of her
power to offer; but she could give her man a
welcome at the end of the day and take lighter
work off his hands. Her cooking was always
a matter of guesswork and to the last she was
stupid, unresourceful and clumsy with her
fingers; but she fetched and carried, washed
pots and garments in the stream, was hewer
of wood and drawer of water and kept their
camp clean and in order. In time she even
learned to take a certain amount of pleasure
in the due fulfilment of her task-work; when
Theodore, having discovered a Spanish chestnut-tree
not far from their dwelling, set her
the job of storing nuts against the winter, she
pointed with pride in the evening to the size
of the heap she had collected.</p>
<p class="c006">Now that she was admittedly his underling,
subdued to his authority, he found it infinitely
easier to be patient with her many blunders;
and though there were still moments when her
brainlessness and limitations galled him to
anger, on the whole he grew fonder of her—with
a patronizing, kindly affection. He
still cherished his plans of exploration unhampered
by her company but, from pity for
the fears she no longer dared to talk of, refrained
from present mention thereof; while
<span class="pageno" id="Page_193">193</span>the nights were long and dark it would be cruel
to leave her, and by the time spring came
round again she might have grown less fearful
of solitude.... Or, before spring came, the
world might make a sign and plans of exploration
be needless.</p>
<p class="c006">Meanwhile, resigning himself to his daily
and solitary round, he worked hard and
anxiously to provision his household for a
second winter of loneliness.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It was when the days were nearly at their
shortest that the round and tenor of his life
was broken by the shock of a disturbing knowledge.
Trudging homewards toward sunset
on a mild December evening, he came upon his
wife sitting groaning in the path; she had
been on her way to the stream for water when
a paroxysm of sickness overtook her. Since
the days of starvation he had never seen her
ill and the violence of the paroxysm frightened
him; when it was over and she leaned on him
exhausted as he led her back to their camping-place,
he questioned her anxiously as to what
had upset her—had she pain, had she eaten
anything unwholesome or unusual? She
shook her head silently in answer to his queries
till he sat her down by the fire; then, as he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_194">194</span>knelt beside her, stirring the logs into a blaze,
she caught his arm suddenly and pressed her
face tightly against it.</p>
<p class="c006">“Ow, Theodore, I’m going to ’ave a baiby!”</p>
<p class="c006">“What?” he said. “What?”—and
stared at her, his mouth wide open....
Perhaps she was hurt or disappointed at his
manner of taking the news; at any rate she
burst into floods of noisy weeping, rocking
herself backwards and forwards and hiding
her face in her hands. He did his best to
soothe her, stroking her hair and encircling
her shoulders with an arm; seeking vainly for
the words that would stay her tears, for something
that would hearten and uplift her. He
supposed she was frightened—more frightened
even than he was; his first bewildered
thought, when he heard the news, had been
“What, in God’s name, shall we do?”</p>
<p class="c006">He drew her head to his shoulder, muttering
“There, there,” as one would to a child, till her
noisy demonstrative sobbing died down to an
intermittent whimper; and when she was
quieted she volunteered an answer to the
question his mind had been forming. She
thought it would be somewhere about five
months—but it mightn’t be so long, she
couldn’t be sure. She didn’t know enough
<span class="pageno" id="Page_195">195</span>about it to be sure—how could she, seeing as it
was her first?... She had been afraid for
ever so long now—weeks and weeks—but
she’d gone on hoping and that was why she
hadn’t said anything about it before. Now
there wasn’t any doubt—she wondered he
hadn’t seen for himself ... and she clung to
him again with another burst of noisy weeping.</p>
<p class="c006">“But,” he ventured uncertainly, reaching
out after comfort, “when it’s over—and
there’s the baby—you’ll be glad, won’t you?”</p>
<p class="c006">His appeal to the maternal instinct had no
immediate success. Ada protested with yet
noisier crying that she was bound to die when
the baby came, so how could she possibly be
glad? It was all very well for him to talk
like that—he didn’t have to go through it!
Lots of women died, even when they had proper
’orspitals and doctors and nurses....</p>
<p class="c006">He listened helplessly, not knowing how to
take her; until, common sense coming to his
aid, he fell back on the certainty that exhausting,
hysterical weeping could by no
possibility be good for her, rebuked her with
authority for upsetting herself and insisted on
immediate self-control. It was well for them
both that wifely obedience was already a
habit with Ada; by the change in his tone
<span class="pageno" id="Page_196">196</span>she recognized an order, pulled herself together,
rubbed her swollen eyes and even made
an effort to help with the preparing of supper—whining
a little, now and again, but checking
the whine before it had risen to a wail.</p>
<p class="c006">She was manifestly cheered by a bowlful
of hot stew—whereof, though she pushed it
away at first, she finished by eating sufficiently;
and, once convinced that the outburst of
emotion was over, he petted her, though not
too sympathetically, lest he stirred her again
to self-pity. She was not particularly responsive
to his hesitating suggestions anent the
coming joys of maternity; more successful
in raising her spirits were his actual encouraging
pats and caresses, his assumption of confidence
greater than he felt in the neighbourhood
of men and women whose hands were
not turned against their fellows.... He
realized that, as the suspicion of her motherhood
grew to a certainty, she had spent long,
lonely hours oppressed by sheer physical
terror; and he reproached himself for having
been carelessly unobservant of a suffering that
should long ere this have been plain to him.</p>
<p class="c006">He was longing to be alone and to think
undistracted; it was a relief to him therefore
when, warmed, fed, and exhausted by her
<span class="pageno" id="Page_197">197</span>crying, she began to nod against his shoulder.
He insisted jestingly on immediate bed, patted
and pulled at her moss-couch before she lay
down, kissed her—whereupon she again cried
a little—and sat beside her, listening, till her
breathing was even and regular. Once sure
that she slept, he crept back to the fire to sit
with his chin on his hands; outside was the
silence of a still December night, where the
only sound was the rush of water and the hiss
and snap of burning logs.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">With his elbows on his knees and his chin on
his hands, he stared into the fire and the
future ... wondering why it had come as a
shock to him—this natural, this almost inevitable
consequence of the life he shared with a
woman? He found no immediate answer to
the question; understanding only that the
animal and unreflecting need which had
driven them into each other’s arms had
coloured their whole sex-relation. They had
lived like the animal, without any thought of
the future.... Now the civilized man in
him demanded that his child should be born
of something more than unreasoning lust of
the flesh and there stirred in him a craving to
reverence the mother of his son.... Ada,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_198">198</span>flaccid, lazy, infantile of mind, was more, for
the moment, than her prosaic, incapable self.
A rush of tenderness swept over him—for her
and for the little insistent life which might,
when its time came, have to struggle into
being unaided....</p>
<p class="c006">With the thought returned the dread which
had flashed into his mind when Ada revealed
to him his fatherhood. If their life in hiding
were destined to continue—if all men within
reach were as those they had fled from, there
would come the moment when—he should
not know what to do!... He remembered,
years ago, in the rooms of a friend, a medical
student, how, with prurient youthful curiosity,
he had picked up a textbook on midwifery—and
sought feverishly to recall what he had
read as he fluttered its pages and eyed its
startling illustrations.</p>
<p class="c006">As had happened sometimes in the first days
of loneliness, the immensity of the world
overwhelmed him; he sat crouched by his
fire, an insect of a man, surrounded by unending
distances. An insect of a man, a pigmy,
whom nature in her vastness ignored; yet, for
all his insignificance, the guardian of life, the
keeper of a woman and her child.... They
would look to him for sustenance, for guidance
<span class="pageno" id="Page_199">199</span>and protection; and he, the little man, would
fend for them—his mate and his young....</p>
<p class="c006">Of a sudden he knew himself close kin to the
bird and beast; to the buck-rabbit diving to
the burrow where his doe lay cuddled with her
soft blind babies; to the round-eyed blackbird
with a beakful gathered for the nest....
The loving, anxious, protective life of the
winged and furry little fathers—its unconscious
sacrifice brought a lump to his throat
and the world was less alien and dreadful
because peopled with his brethren—the guardians
of their mates and their young.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_200">200</span>
<h2 class="c004">XV</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">It was clear to him, so soon as he knew of his
coming fatherhood, that, in spite of the drawbacks
of winter travelling, his long-deferred
journey of exploration must be undertaken
at once; the companionship of men, and
above all of women, was a necessity to be
sought at the risk of any peril or hardship.
Hence—with misgiving—he broached the subject
to Ada next morning; and in the end,
with smaller opposition than he had looked
for, her lesser fears were mastered by her
greater. That the certain future danger of
unaided childbirth might be spared her, she
consented to the present misery of days and
nights of solitude; and together they made
preparations for his voyage of discovery in
the outside world and her lonely sojourn in the
camp.</p>
<p class="c006">As he had expected, her first suggestion had
been that they should break camp and journey
forth together; but he had argued her firmly
out of the idea, insisting less on the possible
<span class="pageno" id="Page_201">201</span>dangers of his journey—which he strove,
rather, to disguise from her—than on her own
manifest unfitness for exertion and exposure
to December weather. Once more the habit
of wifely obedience came to his assistance and
her own, and she bowed to her overlord’s decision—if
tearfully, without temper or sullenness;
while, the decision once taken, it was
he, and not Ada, who lay wakeful through the
night and conjured up visions of possible
disaster in his absence. His imagination was
quickened by the new, strange knowledge of
his responsibility, the protective sense it had
awakened; and, lying wide awake in the still
of the night, it was not only possible danger to
Ada that he dreaded—he was suddenly afraid
for himself. If misfortune befell him on his
journey into the unknown, it would be more
than his own misfortune; on his strength, his
luck and well-being depended the life of his
woman and her unborn child. If evil befell
him and he never came back to them—if he
left his bones in the beyond.... At the
thought the sweat broke out on his face and
he started up shivering on his moss-bed.</p>
<p class="c006">He worked through the day at preparations
for the morning’s departure which, if simple,
demanded thought and time; saw that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_202">202</span>plentiful provision of food and dry fuel lay
ready to his wife’s hand, so that small exertion
would be needed for the making of fire and
meal. For his own provisioning he filled a
bag with cooked fish, chestnuts and the like—store
enough to keep him with care for five or
six days. All was made ready by nightfall
for an early start on the morrow; and he was
awake and afoot with the first reddening of a
dull December morning. Fearing a breakdown
from Ada at the last moment, he had
planned to leave her still asleep; but the
crackling of a log he had thrown on the embers
roused her and she sat up, pushing the tumbled
brown hair from her eyes.</p>
<p class="c006">“You’re gowing?” she asked with a catch
in her voice; and he avoided her eye as he
nodded back “Yes,” and slung his bag over
his shoulder.</p>
<p class="c006">“Just off,” he told her with blatant cheeriness.
“Take care of yourself and have a good
breakfast. There’s water in the cookpot—and
mind you look after the fire. I’ve put
you plenty of logs handy—more than you’ll
want till I come back. Good-bye!”</p>
<p class="c006">“You might say good-bye properly,” she
whimpered after him.</p>
<p class="c006">He affected not to hear and strode away
<span class="pageno" id="Page_203">203</span>whistling; he had purposely tried to make the
parting as careless and unemotional as his
daily going forth to work. Purposely, therefore,
he did not look back until he was too far
away to see her face; it was only when the
trees were about to hide him that he turned,
waved and shouted and saw her lift an arm in
reply. She did not shout back—he guessed
that she could not—and when the trees hid
him he ran for a space, lest the temptation to
follow and call him back should master her.</p>
<p class="c006">He had planned out his journey often
enough during the last few months; considering
the drift of the river and lie of the country
and attempting to reduce them to map-form
on the soil by the aid of a pointed stick. His
idea was to make, in the first place, for the
silent village which had hitherto been the
limit of his voyaging; and thence to follow
the road beside the river which in time, very
surely, must bring him to the haunts of men.
Somewhere on the banks of the river—beyond
the tract of devastated ground—must dwell
those who drank from its waters and fished in
them; who perhaps—now the night of destruction
was over and humanity had ceased
to tear at and prey upon itself—were rebuilding
their civilization and salving their treasures
<span class="pageno" id="Page_204">204</span>from ruin!... The air, crisp and frosty,
set him walking eagerly, and as his body glowed
from the swiftness of his pace a pleasurable
excitement took hold of him; his sweating
fears of the night were forgotten and his brain
worked keenly, adventurously. Somewhere,
and not far, were men like unto himself,
beginning their life and their world anew in
communities reviving and hopeful. Even, it
might be—(he began to dream dreams)—communities
comparatively unscathed; with
homes and lands unpoisoned, unshattered,
living ordered and orderly lives!... Some
such communities the devils of destruction
must have spared ... if a turn in the valley
should reveal to him suddenly a town like the
old towns, with men going out and in!</p>
<p class="c006">He quickened his pace at the thought and
the miles went under him happily. He was
no longer alone; even when he entered the
long waste of coarse grass and blackened tree
that lay around the dead village its dreariness
was peopled with his vivid and hopeful imaginings ... of a crowd that hustled to hear
his story, that questioned and welcomed and
was friendly—and led him to a house that was
furnished and whole ... where were books
and good comfort and talk....</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_205">205</span>So, in pleasant company, he trudged until
well after midday; when, perhaps discouraged
by the beginnings of bodily weariness, perhaps
affected by the sight of the stark village street—his
unreasonable hopefulness passed and
anxiety returned. He grew conscious, suddenly
and acutely, of his actual surroundings;
of silence, of the waste he had trodden, of the
desolation about him, of the unknown loneliness
ahead. That above all—the indefinite,
on-stretching loneliness.... He hurried
through the dumb street nervously, listening
to his own footsteps—the beat and the crunch
of them on a frozen road, their echo against
deserted walls; and at the end of the village
he turned with relief into the road he had
marked on his previous visit, the road that
turned to run by the stream a few yards beyond
the bridge. It wound dismally into a
scorched little wood—not one live shoot in it,
a cemetery of poisoned trees; then on, still
keeping fairly close to the stream, through the
same long waste patched with grass and spreading
weed. The road, though it narrowed and
was overgrown and crumbling in places, was
easy enough to follow for the first few hours, but
he sought in vain for traces of its recent use.
There was no sign of man or the works of man
<span class="pageno" id="Page_206">206</span>in use; the only token of his presence were,
now and again, a fire-blackened cottage, a
jumble of rusted, twisted ironwork or a skeleton
with rank grass thrusting through the
whitened ribs. When the river rounded a
turn in the hills, the prospect before him was
even as the prospect behind; a waste and
silence where corn had once grown and cattle
pastured.</p>
<p class="c006">As the day wore on the heavy silence was
irksome and more than irksome. It was
broken only by the sound of his footsteps, the
whisper of grass in a faint little wind and now
and again—more rarely—by the chirp and
flutter of a bird. Long before dusk he began
to fear the night, to think, with something like
craving, of the shelter and the fire and the
woman beside it—that was home; the thought
of hours of darkness spent alone amongst the
whitened bones of men and the blackened
carcases of trees loomed before him as a growing
threat. He pushed on doggedly, refusing
himself the spell of rest he needed, in the hope
that when night came down on him he might
have left the drear wilderness behind.</p>
<p class="c006">It was a hope doomed to disappointment;
the fall of the early December evening found
him still in the unending waste, and when the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_207">207</span>dusk thickened into darkness he camped,
perforce, near the edge of the river in the lee of
a broken wall. The branches of a dead tree
near by afforded him fuel for the fire that he
kindled with difficulty with the aid of a rough
contrivance of flint and steel; and as he
crouched by the blaze and ate his evening
ration he scanned the night sky with anxious
and observant eyes. So far the weather had
been clear and dry, but he realized the peril
of a break in it, of a snowstorm in shelterless
country.... If to-morrow were only as
to-day—if the waste stretched on without
trace of man or sign of ending—what then?
Would it be wise or safe to push on for yet
another day—leaving home yet further behind
him? For the journey back the waste must
be recrossed, in whatever weather the winter
pleased to send him; traversed by day and
camped on by night, in hail, in rain, in snow....
The thought gave him pause since exposure
might well mean death—and to more
than himself.</p>
<p class="c006">He slept little and brokenly, rousing at
intervals with a shiver as the fire died down for
want of tendance; and was on his feet with
the first grey of morning, trudging forward
with fear at his heels. It was a fear that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_208">208</span>pressed close on them with the passing of long
lonely hours; still wintry hours wherethrough
he strained his eyes for a curl of smoke or a
movement on the outspread landscape....
The day was yesterday over again; the same
pale sky, the dull swollen river that led him on,
and the endless waste of shallow valley; and
when night came down again he knew only
this—a clump of hills that had been distant
was nearer, and he was a day’s tramp further on
his way. He settled at sundown in a copse of
withered trees which afforded him plentiful
firing if little else in the way of shelter from the
night; and having kindled a blaze he warmed
his food, ate and slept—too weary to lie awake
and brood.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">He had not slept long—for the logs still
glowed redly and flickered—when he started
into wakefulness that was instant, complete
and alert. Something—he knew it—had
stirred in the silence and roused him; he sat
up, peered round and listened with the watchful
terror instinctive in the hunted, be the
hunted beast or man. For a moment he
peered round, seeing nothing, hearing nothing
but the whisper of the fire and the beating of
his own heart ... then, in the blackness,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_209">209</span>two points caught the firelight—eyes!...
Eyes unmistakable, that glowed and were
fixed on him....</p>
<p class="c006">He stiffened and stared at them, open-mouthed;
then, as a sudden flicker of the
dying flame showed the outline of a bearded
human face, he choked out something inarticulate
and made to scramble to his feet.
Swift as was the movement he was still on a
knee when someone from behind leaped on him
and pinned both arms to his sides.... As
he wrestled instinctively other hands grasped
him; he was the held and helpless captive of
three or four who clutched him by throat,
wrist and shoulder....</p>
<p class="c006">By that token he was back among men.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_210">210</span>
<h2 class="c004">XVI</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">When they had him down and helpless at
their feet, a dry branch was thrust into the
embers and, as it flamed, held aloft that the
light might fall upon his face. To him it
revealed the half-dozen faces that looked down
at him—weatherworn, hairy and browned
with dirt, the eyes, for the moment, aglow
with the pleasure of the hunter who has
tracked and snared his prey. They held their
prey and gazed at it, as they would have gazed
at and measured a beast they had roped into
helplessness. Satisfaction at the capture
shone in their faces; the natural and grim
satisfaction of him who has met and mastered
his natural enemy.... That, for the moment,
was all; they had met with a man and overcome
him. Curiosity, even, would come later.</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore, after his first instinctive lunge
and struggle, lay motionless—flaccid and
beaten; understanding in a flash that was
agony that men were still what they had been
when he fled from them into the wilderness—beast-men
<span class="pageno" id="Page_211">211</span>who stalked and tore each other.
In the torchlight the dirty, coarse faces were
savage and animal; the eyes that glowered
down at him had the staring intentness of the
animal.... He expected death from a blow
or a knife-thrust, and closed his eyes that he
might not see it coming; and instead saw, as
plainly as with bodily eyes, a vision of Ada
by the camp fire, sitting hunched and listening
for his footstep. Listening for it, staring at
the dreadful darkness—through night after
dreadful night.... In a torment of pity for
his mate and her child he stammered an appeal
for his life.</p>
<p class="c006">“For God’s sake—I wasn’t doing any harm.
If you’ll only listen—my wife.... All that
I want....”</p>
<p class="c006">If they were moved they did not show it, and
it may be they were not moved—having lived,
themselves, through so much of misery and
bodily terror that they had ceased to respond
to its familiar workings in others. Fear and
the expression of fear to them were usual and
normal, and they listened undisturbed while
he tried to stammer out his pleading. Not
only undisturbed but apparently uninterested;
while he spoke one was twisting the knife from
his belt and another taking stock of the contents
<span class="pageno" id="Page_212">212</span>of his food-bag; and he had only gasped
out a broken sentence or two when the holder
of the torch—as it seemed the leader—cut him
short with “Are you alone?”... Once
satisfied on that head he listened no more, but
dropped the torch back on to the fire and
kicked apart the dying embers. The action
was apparently a sign to move on; the hands
that gripped Theodore dragged him to his feet
and urged him forward; and, with a captor
holding to either arm, he stumbled out of the
clump of stark trees into the open desert—now
whitened by a moon at the full.</p>
<p class="c006">There was little enough talk amongst his
captors as, for more than two hours, they
thrust and guided him along; such muttered
talk as there was, was not addressed to their
prisoner and he judged it best to be silent. It
was—so he guessed—the red shine of his fire
that had drawn attention to his presence; and,
the fear of instant death removed, he drew
courage from the thought that the men who
held and hurried him must be dwellers in some
near-by village. Once he had reached it and
been given opportunity to tell his story and
explain his presence, they would cease to hold
him in suspicion—so he comforted himself as
they strode through the wilderness in silence.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_213">213</span>After an hour of steady tramping they
turned inland sharply from the river till a mile
or so brought them to broken, rising ground
and a smaller stream babbling from the hills.
They followed its course, for the most part
steadily uphill, and, at the end of another mile,
the scorched black stumps gave place to trees
uninjured—spruce firs in their solemn foliage
and oaks with their tracery of twigs. A
copse, then a stretch of short turf and the
spring of heather underfoot; then down, to
more trees growing thickly in a hollow—and
through them a glow that was fire. Then
figures that moved, silhouetted, in and out of
the glow and across it; an open space in the
midst of the trees and hut-shapes, half-seen
and half-guessed at, in the mingling of flicker
and deep shadow.... Out of the darkness
a dog yapped his warning—then another—and
at the sound Theodore thrilled and quivered
as at a voice from another world. Now
and again, while he lived in his wilderness, he
had heard the sharp and familiar yelp of some
masterless dog, run wild and hunting for his
food; but the dog that lived with man and
guarded him was an adjunct of civilization!</p>
<p class="c006">The warning had roused the little community
before the newcomers emerged from
<span class="pageno" id="Page_214">214</span>the shadow of the trees; and as they entered
the clearing and were visible, men hurried
towards them, shouting questions. Theodore
found himself the centre of a staring, hustling
group—which urged him to the fire that it
might see him the better, which questioned
his guards while it stared at him.... Here,
too, was the strange aloofness that refrained
from direct address; he was gazed at, stolidly
or eagerly, taken stock of as if he were a beast,
and his guards explained how and where they
had found him, as if he himself were incapable
of speech, as they might have spoken of the
finding of a dog that had strayed from its
owner. Perhaps it was uneasiness that held
him silent, or perhaps he adapted himself
unconsciously to the general attitude; at
any rate—as he remembered afterwards—he
made no effort to speak.</p>
<p class="c006">The men and women who crowded round
him, staring and murmuring, were in number,
perhaps, between thirty and forty; women
with matted hair straggling and men unshorn,
their garments, like his own, a patchwork of
oddments and all of them uncouth and unclean.
One woman, he noted, had a child at
her half-naked breast; a dirty little nursling
but a few months old, its downy pate crusted
<span class="pageno" id="Page_215">215</span>with scabs. He stared at it, wondering as to
the manner of its birth—the mother returning
his scrutiny with open-mouthed interest until
shouldered aside without ceremony by a man
whom Theodore recognized for the leader of
his band of captors. When they reached the
shadow of the clump of trees he had stridden
ahead and vanished, presumably to report and
seek orders from some higher authority; and
now, at a word from him, Theodore was again
jerked forward by his guards and, with the
crowd breaking and trailing<a id="t215"/> behind him, was led
some fifty or sixty yards further to where, on
the edge of the clump of trees, stood a building,
a tumbledown cottage. The moon without
and a fire within showed broken panes stuffed
with moss and a thatched roof falling to decay;
inside the atmosphere was foul and stale, and
heavy with the heat of a blazing wood fire
which alone gave light to the room.</p>
<p class="c006">By the fire, seated on a backless kitchen
chair, sat a man, grey of head and bent of
shoulder; but even in the firelight his eyes
were keen and steely—large bright-blue eyes
that shone under thick grey eyebrows. His
face, with its bright, stubborn eyes and tight
mouth, was—for all its dirt—the face of a
man who gave orders; and it did not escape
<span class="pageno" id="Page_216">216</span>the prisoner that the others—the crowd that
was thrusting and packing itself into the room—were
one and all silent till he spoke.</p>
<p class="c006">“Come nearer,” he said—and on the word,
Theodore was pushed close to him. “Let
him go”—and Theodore was loosed. Someone,
at a sign, lit a stick from the heap beside
the fire and held it aloft; and for a moment,
till it flared itself out, there was silence, while
the old man peered at the stranger. With the
sudden light the hustling and jostling ceased,
and the crowd, like Theodore, waited on the
old man’s words.</p>
<p class="c006">“Tell me,” at last came the order, “what
you were doing here. Tell me everything”—and
he lifted a dirty lean finger like a threat—“what
you were doing on our land, where you
came from, what you want?... and speak
the truth or it will be the worse for you.”</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore told him; while the steel-blue
eyes searched his face as well as they might in
the semi-darkness and the half-seen crowd
stood mute. He told of his life as it had been
lived with Ada; of their complete separation
from their fellows for the space of nearly two
years; of the coming of the child and the
consequent need of help for his wife—conscious,
all the time, not only of the questioning,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_217">217</span>unshrinking eyes of his judge but of the
other eyes that watched him suspiciously from
the corners and shadows of the room. Two or
three times he faltered in his telling, oppressed
by the long, steady silence; for throughout
there was no comment, no word of interest or
encouragement—only once, when he paused
in the hope of encouragement, the old man
ordered “Go on!”... He went on, striving
to steady his voice and pleading against he
knew not what of hostility, suspicion and fear.</p>
<p class="c006">“... And so,” he ended uncertainly,
“they found me. I wasn’t doing any harm....
I suppose they saw my fire?...”</p>
<p class="c006">From someone in the darkness behind him
came a grunt that might indicate assent—then,
again, there was silence that lasted....
The dumb, heavy threat of it was suddenly
intolerable and Theodore broke it with vehemence.</p>
<p class="c006">“For God’s sake tell me what you’re going
to do! It’s not much I ask and it’s not for
myself I ask it. If you can’t help me yourselves
there must be other people who can—tell
me where I am and where I ought to go.
My wife—she must have help.”</p>
<p class="c006">There was no actual response to his outburst,
but some of the half-seen figures stirred and he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_218">218</span>heard a muttering in the shadow that he took
for the voices of women.</p>
<p class="c006">“Tell me where I am,” he repeated, “and
where I can go for help.”</p>
<p class="c006">It was the first question only that was
answered.</p>
<p class="c006">“You are on our land.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Your land—but where is it? In what part
of England?”</p>
<p class="c006">“I don’t know,” said the old man and
shrugged his lean shoulders. “But you
haven’t any right on it. It’s ours.”</p>
<p class="c006">He pushed back his chair and stood up to
his full, tall height; then, raising his hand,
addressed the assembly of his followers.</p>
<p class="c006">“You have all of you heard what he said
and know what he wants. Now let me hear
what you think. Say it out loud and not in
each other’s ears.”</p>
<p class="c006">He dropped his arm and stood waiting a
reply—and after a moment one came from the
back of the room.</p>
<p class="c006">“It’s winter,” said a man’s voice, half-sulky,
half-defiant, “and we’ve hardly enough
left for ourselves. We don’t want any more
mouths here—we’ve more than we can fill as
it is.” A murmur of agreement encouraged
him and he went on—louder and pushing
<span class="pageno" id="Page_219">219</span>through the crowd as he spoke. “We fend
for our own and he must fend for his. He
ought to think himself lucky if we let him go
after we’ve taken him on our land. What
business had he there?”</p>
<p class="c006">This time the murmur of agreement was
stronger and a second voice called over it:</p>
<p class="c006">“If we catch him here again he won’t get
off so easily!”</p>
<p class="c006">The assent that followed was more than
assent; applause that swelled and grew
almost clamorous. The old man stilled it
with a lifting of his knotted hand.</p>
<p class="c006">“Then you won’t have him here? You
don’t want him?”</p>
<p class="c006">The “No” in answer was vigorous; refusal,
it seemed, was unanimous. Theodore
tried to speak, to explain that all he asked ... but again the knotted hand was lifted.</p>
<p class="c006">“And are you—for letting him go?”</p>
<p class="c006">The words dropped out slowly and were
followed by a hush—significant as the question
itself.... This much was clear to the
listener: that behind them lay a fear and a
threat. The nature of the threat could be
guessed at—since they would not keep him
and dared not let him go; but where and what
was the motive for the fear that had prompted
<span class="pageno" id="Page_220">220</span>the slow, sly question and the uneasy silence
that followed it?... He heard his own
heart-beats in the long uneasy silence—while
he sought in vain for the reason of their dread
of one man and tried in vain to find words.
It seemed minutes—long minutes—and not
seconds till a voice made answer from the
shadows:</p>
<p class="c006">“Not if it isn’t safe.”</p>
<p class="c006">And at the words, as a signal, came voices
from this side and that—speech hurried, excited
and tumultuous. It wasn’t safe—what
did they know of him and how could they
prove his story true? He might be a spy—now
he knew where to find them, knew they
had food, he might come back and bring others
with him! When he tried to speak the voices
grew louder, over-shouted him—and one man
at his side, gesticulating wildly, cried out that
they would be mad to let him go, since they
could not tell how much he knew. The phrase
was taken up, as it seemed in panic—by man
after man and woman after woman—they
could not tell how much he knew! They
pressed nearer as they shouted, their faces
closing in on him—spitting, working mouths
and angry eyes. They were handling him
almost; and when once they handled him—he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_221">221</span>knew it—the end would be sure and swift.
He dared not move, lest fingers went up to
his throat. He dared not even cry out.</p>
<p class="c006">It was the old man who saved him with
another call for silence. Not out of mercy—there
was small mercy in the lined, dirty face—but
because, it seemed, there was yet
another point to be considered.</p>
<p class="c006">“If they came again”—he jerked his head
towards the open—“we should be a man the
stronger. Now they are stronger than we are—by
nearly a dozen....”</p>
<p class="c006">Apparently the argument had weight, for its
hearers stood uncertain and arrested—and
instinct bade Theodore seize on the moment
they had given him.... What he said in
the beginning he could not remember—how he
caught their attention and held it—but when
cooler consciousness returned to him they
were listening while he bargained for his life....
He bargained and haggled for the right
to live—offering goods and sweat and muscle
in exchange for a place on the earth. He was
strong and would work for them; he could
hunt and fish and dig; he would earn by his
labour every mouthful that fell to him, every
mouthful that fell to his wife.... More, he
had food of his own laid away for the winter
<span class="pageno" id="Page_222">222</span>months—dried fish and nuts and the store of
fruit he had salved and hoarded from the
autumn. These all could be fetched and
shared if need be.... He bribed them while
they haggled with their eyes. Let them come
with him—any of them—and prove what he
said; he had more than enough—let them
come with him.... When he stopped, exhausted
and sobbing for breath, the extreme
of the danger had passed.</p>
<p class="c006">“If he has food,” someone grunted—and
Theodore, turning to the unseen speaker, cried
out—“I swear I have! I swear it!”</p>
<p class="c006">He hoped he had won; and then knew
himself in peril again when the man who had
raised the cry before repeated doggedly that
they could not tell how much he knew....</p>
<p class="c006">“Take him away,” said the old man suddenly.
“You take him—you two”—and he
pointed twice. “Keep him while we talk—till
I send for you.”</p>
<p class="c006">At least it was reprieve and Theodore knew
himself in safety, if only for a passing moment.
For their own comfort, if not for his, his guards
escorted him to the fire in the open, where they
crouched down, stolid and watchful, Theodore
between them—exhausted by emotion and
flaccid both in body and mind.... There
<span class="pageno" id="Page_223">223</span>was a curious relief in the knowledge that he
had shot his last bolt and could do nothing
more to save himself; that whatever befell
him—release or swift death—was a happening
beyond his control. No effort more was required
of him and all that he could do was to
wait.</p>
<p class="c006">He waited dumbly, in the end almost
drowsily, with his head bent forward on his
knees.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_224">224</span>
<h2 class="c004">XVII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">After minutes, or hours, a hand was laid on
his shoulder and shook it; he raised his eyes
stupidly, saw his guards already on their feet
and with them a third man—sent, doubtless,
with orders to summon them. He rose, knowing
that a decision had been made, one way
or another, but still oddly numb and unmoved....
The two men with him thrust
a way into the crowded little room, elbowing
their fellows aside till they had pushed and
dragged their charge to the neighbourhood of
the fireplace and set him face to face with his
judge. As they fell back a pace or two—as
far as the crowding of the room allowed—someone
again lit a branch at the fire and held
it up that the light might fall upon the
prisoner.</p>
<p class="c006">To Theodore the action brought with it a
conviction that his sentence was death and
his manner of receiving it a diversion for the
eyes of the beholders.... The old man was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_225">225</span>waiting, intent, with his chin on his hand,
that he might lengthen the diversion by
lengthening the suspense of the prisoner....</p>
<p class="c006">When he spoke at last his words were a
surprise—instead of a judgment, came a
query.</p>
<p class="c006">“What were you?” he asked suddenly;
and, at the unexpected, irrelevant question,
Theodore, still numb, hesitated—then repeated
mechanically, “What was I?”</p>
<p class="c006">“In the days before the Ruin—what were
you? What sort of work did you do? How
did you earn your living?”</p>
<p class="c006">He knew that, pointless as the question
seemed, there was something that mattered
behind it; his face was being searched for the
truth and the ring of listeners had ceased to
jostle and were waiting in silence for the
answer.</p>
<p class="c006">“I—I was a clerk,” he stammered, bewildered.</p>
<p class="c006">“A clerk,” the other repeated—as it seemed
to Theodore suspiciously. “There were a
great many different kinds of clerks—they
did all sorts of things. What did you do?”</p>
<p class="c006">“I was a civil servant,” Theodore explained.
“A clerk in the Distribution Office—in Whitehall.”</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_226">226</span>“That means you wrote letters—did accounts?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes. Wrote letters, principally ... and
filed them. And drew up reports....”</p>
<p class="c006">The question sent him back through the
ages. In the eye of his mind he saw his
daily office—the shelves, the rows of files,
interminable files—and himself, neat-suited,
clean-fingered, at his desk. Neat-suited,
clean-fingered and idling through a short day’s
work; with Cassidy’s head at the desk by the
window—and Birnbaum, the Jew boy, who
always wore a buttonhole.... He brought
himself back with an effort, from then to
now—from the seemly remembrance of the
life bureaucratic to a crowd of evil-smelling
savages....</p>
<p class="c006">“You were always that—just a clerk?
You have never had any other way of earning
a living?”... And again he knew that the
answer mattered, that his “No!” was listened
for intently.</p>
<p class="c006">“You weren’t ever an engineer?” the old
man persisted. “Or a scientific man of any
kind?”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” Theodore repeated, “I have never
had anything to do with either engineering or
science. When I left the University I went
<span class="pageno" id="Page_227">227</span>straight into the Distribution Office and I
stayed there till the war.”</p>
<p class="c006">“University!” The word (so it seemed to
him) was snatched at. “You’re a college
man?”</p>
<p class="c006">“I was at Oxford,” Theodore told him.</p>
<p class="c006">“A college man—then they must have
taught you science. They always taught it at
colleges. Chemistry and that sort of thing—you
know chemistry?”</p>
<p class="c006">In the crowd was a sudden thrill that was
almost murmur; and Theodore hesitated
before he answered, his tongue grown dry in
his mouth.... Were these people, these outcasts
from civilization, hoping to find in him
a guide and saviour who should lighten the
burden of their barbarism by leading them
back to the science which had once been a part
of their daily life, but of which they had no
practical knowledge?... If so, how far was
it safe to lie to them? and how far, having
lied, could he disguise his dire ignorance of
processes mechanical and chemical? What
would they hope from him, expect in the way
of achievement and proof?... Miracles, perhaps—sheer
blank impossibilities....</p>
<p class="c006">“Science—they taught it you,” the old man
was reiterating, insisting.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_228">228</span>“Yes, they taught it me,” he stammered,
delaying his answer. “That is to say, I
used to attend lectures....”</p>
<p class="c006">“Then you know chemistry? Gases and
how to make them?... And machines—do
you know about machines? You could help
us with machines—tell us how to make one?”</p>
<p class="c006">The dirty old face peered up at him, waiting
for his “Yes”; and he knew the other
faces that he could not see were peering from
the shadow with the same odd, sinister eagerness.
All waiting, expectant.... The temptation
to lie was overwhelming and what held
him back was no scruple of conscience but the
brute impossibility of making good his claim
to a knowledge he did not possess. The utter
ignorance betrayed by the form of the old
man’s speech—“You know chemistry—do
you know about machines?”—would make no
allowance for the difficulty of applying knowledge
and see no difference between theory
and instant practice.... In his hopelessness
he gave them the truth and the truth only.</p>
<p class="c006">“I have told you already I am not an
engineer—I have never had any training in
mechanics. As for chemistry—I had to attend
lectures at school and college. But that was
all—I never really studied it and I’m afraid
<span class="pageno" id="Page_229">229</span>I remember very little—almost nothing that
would be of any practical use to you.... I
don’t know what you want but, whatever it is,
it would need some sort of apparatus—a
chemist has to have his tools like other men.
Even if I were a trained chemist I should need
those—even if I were a trained chemist I
couldn’t separate gases with my bare hands.
For that sort of thing you need a laboratory—a
workshop—the proper appliances.... I’ll
work for you in any way that’s possible—any
way—but you mustn’t expect impossibilities,
chemistry and mechanics from a man who
hasn’t been trained in them.... And why
should you expect me to do what you can’t
do yourselves—why should you? Is it
fair?...”</p>
<p class="c006">There was no immediate answer, but suddenly
he knew that the silence around him
had ceased to be threatening and tense. The
old man’s eyes had left his own; they were
moving round the room and searching, as it
seemed, for assent.... In the end they came
back to Theodore—and judgment was given.</p>
<p class="c006">“If you are what you say you are, we will
take you; but if you have lied to us and you
know what is forbidden, we shall find you out
sooner or later and, as sure as you stand there,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_230">230</span>we will kill you. If you are what you say you
are—a plain man like us and without devil’s
knowledge—you may come to us and bring
your woman, if she also is without devil’s
knowledge. That is, if you can feed her; we
have only enough for ourselves. And from
this day forward you will be our man; and
to-morrow you will take the oath to be what
we are and live as we do, and be our man
against all our enemies and perils. Are you
agreed to that?”</p>
<p class="c006">He was saved and Ada with him—so much
he knew; but as yet it was not clear what had
saved him. He was to be their man—take an
oath and be one with them—and there was the
phrase “devil’s knowledge,” twice repeated....
He stared stupidly at the man who had
granted his life—realizing that his ordeal was
over only when the packed room emptied
itself and the old man turned back to his fire.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_231">231</span>
<h2 class="c004">XVIII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">It was the phrase “devil’s knowledge” that,
when his first bewilderment was over, gave
Theodore the clue to the meaning of the scene
he had lived through and the outlook of those
whose man he would become on the morrow.
That and the sudden memory of Markham ... on the crest of the centuries, on the night
when the crest curled over...</p>
<p class="c006">He was so far taken into tribal fellowship
that he had ceased to be openly a prisoner;
but the two men who, for the rest of the night,
shared with him the shelter of a lean-to hut,
took care to bestow themselves between their
guest and the entrance. He got little out of
them in the way of enlightenment, for they
were asleep almost as they flung themselves
down on their moss; but for hours, while they
snored, Theodore lay open-eyed, piecing together
his fragmentary information of the
world into which he had strayed.</p>
<p class="c006">“Without devil’s knowledge”—that, if he
understood aright, was the qualification for
<span class="pageno" id="Page_232">232</span>admission to the life that had survived
disaster. “Devil’s knowledge” being—if he
was not mad—the scientific, mechanical,
engineering lore which was the everyday
acquirement of thousands on thousands of
ordinary civilized men. The everyday acquirements
of ordinary men were anathema;
if he was not mad, his own life had been granted
him for the reason only that he was unskilled
and devoid of them. Ignorant, even as the
men who spared him, of practical science and
mechanics—a plain man, like unto them....
Ignorance was prized here, esteemed as a
virtue—the old man’s query, “You’re a college
man?” had been accusation disguised.</p>
<p class="c006">In a flash it was clear to him, and he saw
through the farce whereby he had been tested
and tempted; understood the motive that had
prompted its cruel low cunning and all that
the cunning implied of acceptance of barbarism,
insistence on it.... What these
outcasts, these remnants of humanity feared
above all things was a revival of the science,
the mechanical powers, that had wrecked
their cities, their houses and their lives and
made them—what they were.... In knowledge
was death and in ignorance alone was a
measure of peace and security; hence, fearing
<span class="pageno" id="Page_233">233</span>lest he was of those who knew too much, they
had tempted him to confess to forbidden knowledge,
to boast of it—that, having boasted,
they might kill him without mercy, make an
end of his wits with his life. In the torments
inflicted by science destructive they had
turned upon science and renounced it; and,
that their terrors might not be renewed in the
future, they were setting up against it an
impassable barrier of ignorance. They had
put devil’s knowledge behind them—with
intention for ever.... If when they questioned
him and led him on, he had yielded to
the natural impulse to lie, they would have
knocked him on the head—like vermin—without
scruple; and the sweat broke out
on him as he remembered how nearly he had
lied....</p>
<p class="c006">He sat up, sweating and staring at darkness,
and thrust back the hair from his forehead....
He was back among men—who, of set
purpose and deliberately, had turned their
faces from the knowledge their fathers had
acquired by the patience and toil of generations!
Who, of set purpose and deliberately,
sought to filch from their children the heritage
of the ages, the treasure of the mind of man!...
That was what it meant—the treasure of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_234">234</span>the mind of man! Renunciation of all that
long generations had striven for with patience
and learning and devotion.... The impossibility
and the treason of it—to know nothing,
to forget all their fathers had won for them....
He remembered old talk of education as
a birthright and the agitations of reformers
and political parties. To this end.</p>
<p class="c006">Who were they, he asked himself, these
people who had made a decision so terrible—what
manner of men in the old life? Now
they were seeking to live as the beasts live,
and not only the world material had died to
them, but the world of human aspiration....
To this they had come, these people who once
were human—the beast in them had conquered
the brain ... and like fire there blazed into
his brain the commandment: “Thou shalt
not eat of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge!
Thou shalt not eat ... lest ye die.”</p>
<p class="c006">The command, the prohibition, had suddenly
a new significance. Was this, then, the
purport of a legend hitherto meaningless?
Was this the truth behind the childish symbol?
The deadly truth that knowledge is power of
destruction—power of destruction too great
for the human, the fallible, to wield?...
Odd that he had never thought of it before—that,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_235">235</span>familiar all his life with a deadly truth,
he had read it as primitive childishness!</p>
<p class="c006">“Of the Tree of the Knowledge of good
and evil thou shalt not eat ... lest ye
die....”</p>
<p class="c006">He sat numbly repeating the words half
aloud till there flashed into his brain a memory,
a vision of Markham. In his room off Great
Smith Street on the night when war was declared—talking
rapidly with his mouth full of
biscuit. “Only one thing I’m fairly certain
about—I ought to have been strangled at
birth.... If the human animal must fight, it
should kill off its scientific men. Stamp out
the race of ’em!”... What was that but a
paraphrase, a modern application of the command
laid upon Adam. “Of the Tree of the
Knowledge of good and evil thou shalt not
eat ... lest ye die.”</p>
<p class="c006">To his first impulse—of amazement and
shrinking, as from treason—succeeded understanding
of the outlook of these men and their
decision. More, he wondered why, even in
the worst of his despair, he had always believed
in the persistence, the re-birth, of the civilization
that had bred him.... These people—he
saw it—were logical, as Markham had been
logical—were wise after the event as Markham
<span class="pageno" id="Page_236">236</span>had been wise before it; and it amazed him
that in his porings and guessings at a world
reviving he had never hit upon their simple
solution of the eternal problem of war. Markham’s
solution; which, till this moment, he
had not taken literally.... “You can’t
combine the practice of science and the art
of war; in the end it’s one or the other. We,
I think, are going to prove that—very definitely.”
One or the other. The fighting
instinct or knowledge!</p>
<p class="c006">Man, because he fights, must deny himself
knowledge—which is power over the forces
of nature; the secrets of nature must be
veiled from him by his own ignorance—lest,
when the impulse to strife wells up in him,
they serve him for infinite destruction. These
renegades, in agony, had made confession of
their sin, of the corporate sin of a world;
had faced the brutality of their own nature;
had denied themselves the fruit of the Tree
of Knowledge, and led themselves out of
temptation. Since fight they must, being
men with men’s passions, they would limit
their powers of destruction.... So he read
their strange self-denying ordinance.</p>
<p class="c006">The thought led him on to wonder whether
they were alone in their self-denying ordinance....
<span class="pageno" id="Page_237">237</span>Surely not—unless they lived hidden, in
complete isolation, out of contact with others
of their kind. And obviously they did not
live isolated; they had spoken of others who
were stronger, and of land that was theirs—implying
a system of boundary and penalty
for trespass and theft. Further, the phrase
“against all enemies” indicated at least a
possibility of the contact that was bloodshed—yet
enemies who had not renounced the
advantage of mechanical and scientific
knowledge would be enemies who could
overwhelm at the first encounter a community
fighting as barbarians.... What,
then, was their relation to a world more
civilized and communities that had not
renounced?...</p>
<p class="c006">In the end, from sheer exhaustion, he ceased
to surmise and argue with himself—and slept
suddenly and heavily, huddling for warmth
on his moss-bed against the body of his nearest
gaoler.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It was a thrust from a foot that awakened
him, and he crawled out shivering into the
half-light of dawn and the chill of a frostbitten
morning; the camp was alive and
emerging from its shelters, the women already
<span class="pageno" id="Page_238">238</span>occupied in cooking the morning meal. Theodore
and his guardians shared a bowl of steaming
mess; a mingling of potatoes, dried greenstuff
and gobbets of meat which he guessed to
be rat-flesh. They shared it wolfishly, each
man eating fast lest his fellows had more than
their portion; the meal over, the bowl was
flung back to the women for washing, and his
gaolers—his mates now—relaxed; there was
no further reason for unfriendliness and they
were willing enough to be communicative,
with the slow uncommunicativeness of men
who have little but their daily round to talk
about.</p>
<p class="c006">They had neighbours, yes—at least what
you might call neighbours; there was a
settlement, much the same size as their own,
some three or four hours’ journey away, on
the other side of the river—that was the
nearest, and the tribesmen met sometimes but
not often. Being questioned, they explained
that there was frequent trouble about fishing
rights—where our stretch of river ended and
theirs began; trouble and, now and then,
fighting. Yes, of course, they lived as we do—how
else should they live?... They were
better off for shelter, having taken possession
of a village—but we, in the hills, were much
<span class="pageno" id="Page_239">239</span>safer, not so easy to attack or surprise....
No, they were not the only ones; on this side
the river, but farther away, was another settlement,
a larger one; there had been trouble
with them, too, as they were very short of
food and sent out raiding parties. They had
fallen on the village across the water, carried
off some of its winter stock and set light to
three or four houses; later—a month ago—they
had fallen on us, less successfully
because we were warned and on the look-out
for them.... That was why we always
have watchers at night—the watchers who
saw your fire....</p>
<p class="c006">Even from a first halting conversation with
men who found anything but sheer statement
of fact a difficulty, Theodore was able to construct
in outline the common life of this new
humanity, its politics, internal and external.
The constitution of the tribe—the origin and
keystone of the social system—had been, in
the beginning, as much a matter of reckless
chance as the mating of himself and Ada;
small wandering groups of men, who had come
alive through the agony of war and famine, had
been knit together by a common need or a
terror of loneliness, and insensibly welded into
a whole, an embryo community. It was a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_240">240</span>matter of chance, too, in the beginning whether
the meeting with another little wandering
group would result in bloodshed for the possession
of food—sometimes for the possession
of women—or a welcome and the joining up of
forces; but to the joining-up process there
was always a limit—the limit of resources
available. A tribe which desired to augment
its strength as against its rivals was faced
with the difficulty of filling many hungry
mouths.... Their own community had once
been faced with such a difficulty and had
solved it by driving out three or four of its
weaker members.</p>
<p class="c006">“What became of them?” asked Theodore,
and was told no one knew. It was winter when
food ran short and they were driven out—and
some of them had come back after nightfall to
the edge of the camp and cried to be allowed
in again. Till the men ran out and drove them
off with sticks and stone-throwing. After
that they went and were no more seen....
Later, in the summer, there had broken out a
sickness which again reduced their numbers.
When the wind blew for long up the valley it
brought a bad smell with it—and flies. That
was what caused the sickness. There had
been a great deal of it; it was said that in a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_241">241</span>village lower down the river more than half
the inhabitants had died.</p>
<p class="c006">He surmised as he listened—and realized
later—that it was the need of avoiding constant
strife that had broken the nomadic habit
and solidified the wandering and fluid groups
into tribes with a settled dwelling-place. Until
a limit was set to their wanderings, groups and
single nomads drifted hither and thither in the
search for food, snarling at each other when
they met; the end of sheer anarchy came with
appropriation, by a particular group, of a
stretch of country which gave some promise
of supporting it. That entailed the institution
of communal property, the setting up of a
barrier against the incursions of others—a
barrier which was also a limit beyond which
the group must not trespass on the land and
possessions of others.... Swiftly, insensibly
and naturally, there was growing up a system
of boundaries; boundaries established, in the
first place, by chance, by force or rough custom
and defined later by meetings between headmen
of villages. Within its boundaries each
tribe or group existed as best it might, overstepping
its limits at its peril; but disputing
at intervals—as men have disputed since the
world began—the precise terms of the agreement
<span class="pageno" id="Page_242">242</span>that defined its limits. And, agreements
being verbal only, there were many occasions
for dispute.</p>
<p class="c006">As he questioned his new-made comrades
and heard their answers, there died in Theodore’s
heart the hope that these people into
whose midst he had stumbled—these people
living like the beasts of the field—were but
dwellers on the outskirts of a world reviving
and civilized. Of men existing in any other
fashion than their own he heard no mention,
no rumour; there was talk only of a camp
here and a village there—where men fished
and hunted and scratched the ground that
they might find the remains of other’s sowing.
The formal intercourse between the various
groups was suspicious and slyly diplomatic,
an affair of the meetings of headmen; though
now and again, as life grew more certain, there
was trading in the form of barter. One community
had settled in a stretch of potato-fields,
left derelict, which, even under rough
and unskilled cultivation, yielded more than
sufficient for its needs; another, by some
miracle, had possessed itself of goats—three
or four in the first instance, found wild among
the hills, escaped from the hungry, indiscriminate
slaughter which had bared the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_243">243</span>countryside of cattle. These they bred, were
envied for, guarded with arms in their hands
and occasionally bartered; not without bitter
resentment and dispute at the price their
advantage exacted.... But of those who
possessed more than goats or the leavings of
other men’s fields, who lived as men had been
wont to live in the days when the world was
civilized—not a trace, not so much as a word!</p>
<p class="c006">Direct questioning brought only a shake of
the head. Towns—yes, of course there were
towns—further on; but no one lived in
them—you could not get a living out of pavements,
bricks and hard roads.... Up the
river—the way he had come—was a stretch
of dead land where nothing grew and no one
lived; he had seen it for himself and knew
best what lay beyond it. Lower down the
river were the other camps like their own; so
many they knew of, and others they had heard
of further off. In the distance—on the other
side of those hills—there had been a large
town in the old days; ruins of it—miles of
streets and ruins—were lying on both banks
of the river. They themselves had never
entered it—only seen it from a distance—but
those who lived nearer had said it was mostly
in ruins and that bodies were thick in the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_244">244</span>streets. In the summer, they had heard, it
was forbidden to enter it; because it was
those who had gone there in search of plunder
who first were smitten with the sickness which
spread from their camp along the valley. It
was the wind blowing over the town—so they
said—which brought the bad smell and the
flies.... No, they did not know its name;
had never heard it.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It was when he turned from the present to
the past that Theodore found himself against
a barrier, the barrier unexpected of a plain
unwillingness to talk of the world that had
vanished. When spoken of at all it was
spoken of carefully, with precaution and
choosing of phrase, and no man gave easily
many details of his life before the Ruin.</p>
<p class="c006">At first the strange attitude puzzled him—he
could make nothing of the odd, suspicious
glances whereby questioning was met, the
attempt to parry it, the cautious, non-committal
replies; it was only by degrees that he
grasped their significance and understood how
complete was that renunciation of the past
which these people had imposed upon themselves.
Forgetfulness—so Theodore learned in
time—was more than a precaution; it had
<span class="pageno" id="Page_245">245</span>been preached in the new-born world as a
religion, accepted as an article of faith. The
prophet who had expressed the common need
and instinct in terms of religion had in due
time made his appearance; a wild-eyed,
eloquent scarecrow of a man, aflame with
belief in his sacred mission and with loathing
for the sins of the world. Coming from no one
knew where, he carried his gospel through a
land left desolate, proclaiming his creed of
salvation through ignorance and crying woe
on the yet unrepentant sinners who should
seek to preserve the deadly knowledge that
had brought God’s judgment on the world!</p>
<p class="c006">The seed of his doctrine fell on fruitful soil—on
brutalized minds in starved bodies; the
shaggy, half-naked enthusiast was hailed as a
law-giver, saint and saviour, and the harvest
of souls was abundant. On every side the
faith was embraced with fervour; the bitter
experience of the convert confirming the
prophet’s inspiration. Tribe after tribe reconciled
itself to a God who had turned in wrath
from His creatures, offended by their upstart
pretensions and encroachments on the power
of Deity. Tribe after tribe made confession
of its sin, grovelling at the feet of a jealous
Omnipotence and renouncing the works of the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_246">246</span>devil and the deadly pride of the intellect; and
in tribe after tribe there were hideous little
massacres—blood-offerings, sweet and acceptable
sacrifice, that should purify mankind
from its guilt. Those who were known to have
pried into the hidden secrets of Omnipotence
were cut off in their wickedness, lest they
should corrupt others—were dragged to the
feet of the prophet and slaughtered, lest they
should defile humanity anew through the
pride of the intellect and the power of their
devil-sent knowledge. Men known to be
learned or suspected of learning; men possessed
of no more than mechanical training
and skill.... There was a story of one whom
certain in the tribe would have spared—a
doctor of medicine who had comforted many
in the past. But the prophet cried out that
this uttermost sacrifice, too, was demanded
of them till, frenzied with piety, they turned
on their healer and beat out the brains that
had served them.... And over the bodies
had followed an orgy of repentance, of groaning
and revivalistic prayer; the priest blessing
the sacrifice with uplifted arms and calling
down the vengeance of God Most High upon
those who should be false to the vow they had
sworn in the blood of sinners. He chanted
<span class="pageno" id="Page_247">247</span>the vow, they repeating it after him; taking
oath to renounce the evil thing, to stamp it
out wherever met with, in man, in woman, in
child.</p>
<p class="c006">The prophet (so Theodore learned) had continued
his wanderings, preaching the gospel
as he went—through village after village and
settlement after settlement, till he passed
beyond the confines of report. He had bidden
his followers expect his return; but whether
he came again or not, his doctrine was firmly
established. He had left behind him the germs
of a priesthood, a tradition and a Law for his
converts—a Law which included the penalty
of death for those who should fail to keep the
vow....</p>
<p class="c006">Lest it should fade from their minds, there
were days set apart for renewal of the vow,
for public, ceremonial repetition of the creed
and doctrine of ignorance; and, with the
Ruin an ever-present memory to the remnant
of humanity, the tendency was to interpret
the Law with all strictness—there were
devotees and fanatics who watched with a
mingling of animal fear and religious hate for
signs of relapse and backsliding. Denunciation
was of all things dreaded; and outspoken
regret for a world that had passed had more
<span class="pageno" id="Page_248">248</span>than once been pretext for denunciation. To
dwell in speech on the doings of that world
might be interpreted—had been interpreted—as
a hankering after the Thing Forbidden, a
desire to revive the Accursed.... Hence the
parrying of questions, the barrier of protective
silence which the newcomer broke through
with difficulty.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It took more than a day for Theodore to
understand his new world and its meaning, to
grasp its social system and civil and religious
polity; but at the end of one day he knew
roughly the conditions in which he was
destined to live out the rest of his life.</p>
<p class="c006">Not that, in the beginning, he admitted
that so he must live; it was long—many
years—before he resigned himself to the
knowledge that his limits, till death released
him, were the narrow limits of his tribe. For
years he held secretly—but none the less fast—to
the hope of a civilization that must one day
reveal itself, advance and overwhelm his
barbarians. For years he strained his eyes
for the coming of its pioneers, its saviours; it
was long—very long—before he gave up his
hopes and faced the certainty that, if the world
he had known continued to exist, it existed
<span class="pageno" id="Page_249">249</span>too feebly and too far away to stretch out to
himself and his surroundings.</p>
<p class="c006">There were times when the longing for it
flared and burned in him, and he sought
desperately for traces of the world he had
known—running hither and thither in search
of it. Under pretext of a hunting expedition
he would absent himself from the tribe, and
trespass—often at the imminent risk of death—on
the territory of alien communities; returning,
after days, no nearer to his goal and
no wiser for his stealthy prowlings. The life
of alien communities, the prospect revealed
from strange hills, was, to all intents and purposes,
the life and outlook of his tribe....
He would question the occasional stranger
from a distant village, in the hope of at least
a word, a rumour—a rumour that might give
guidance for further and more hopeful search.
But those who came from distant villages
spoke only of villages more distant; of other
hunting-grounds, of other tribal feuds, of
other long stretches of ruin.... The world,
so far as it came within his ken, was cut to
one pattern, the pattern of a cowed and brutalized
man, who bent his face to the stubborn
ground and forgot the cunning of his fathers.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_250">250</span>
<h2 class="c004">XIX</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">The actual and formal ceremony of his acceptance
into the little community took place
after night had fallen; deferred to that hour
in part because, with nightfall, the day’s
labour ceased and the fishermen and snarers
of birds had returned to their dwelling-place—and
in part because darkness, lit only by
the glow of torches and wood fires, lent an
added solemnity to the rite.</p>
<p class="c006">Earlier in the day the new tribesman had
been summoned to a second interview with
the headman. The old man questioned him
shrewdly enough as to his road, the nature of
his winter food store and the feasibility of
transporting it; and it was settled finally
that Theodore should depart with the morning
accompanied by another from the tribe.
The pair could row and tow up the river a
flat-bottomed boat which was one of the community’s
possessions; and as his own camp
was only a few hours’ tramp from navigable
water, he and his companion should be able,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_251">251</span>with a day or two, to make three or four
journeys from camp to riverside and load the
boat with as much as it would carry of his
hoard. If the weather favoured—if snow
held off and storm—they might return within
five or six days.</p>
<p class="c006">His instructions received, he was dismissed;
and bidden, since he would need a hut for
himself and his wife, to set about its building
at once. A site was allotted him on the edge
of the copse that was the centre of the tribal
life and he was granted the use of some of the
tools that were common property—an axe,
a mallet, and a spade. By the time the sun
set his dwelling had made some progress;
stakes had been driven in to serve as corner-posts,
and logs laid from one to the other.</p>
<p class="c006">With dusk, by twos and threes, the men had
drifted back to the village and the women were
busied with the cooking of supper at fires that
blazed in the open, so long as the weather was
dry, as well as at the mud-built ovens that
sheltered a flame from the wind. When they
kept their men waiting for the plates and
bowls of food there was impatient shouting
and now and then a blow.... Theodore, as
he ate his supper, noted suddenly that though
one or two of the women carried babies, the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_252">252</span>camp contained no child that was older than
the crawling stage—no child that survived
the Disaster.</p>
<p class="c006">The night was rainless, and when the meal
was over the men, for the most part, lay or
crouched near their fires—some torpid, some
talking with their women; but they roused
and stood upright when the ceremony began,
and the headman, calling for silence, beckoned
with a dirty claw to Theodore.</p>
<p class="c006">“Here!” said Theodore and went to him.
The old man was seated on the trunk of a
fallen tree; he waited till the tribesmen, one
and all, had ranged themselves on either hand
and then signed to Theodore to kneel.</p>
<p class="c006">“Give me both your hands,” he ordered—and
held them between his own. As in days
long past—(so Theodore remembered)—the
overlord, the suzerain, had taken the hands of
his vassal.... Did he remember—this latter-day
barbarian—the ritual of chivalry, the
feudal customs of Capet, Hohenstaufen and
Plantagenet? Or was his imitation of their
lordly rite unconscious?</p>
<p class="c006">“So that you may live and be one of us,”
the old man began, “you will swear two things—to
be true to your fellows and humble and
meek towards God. Before God and before
<span class="pageno" id="Page_253">253</span>all of us you will take your oath; and, if you
break it, may you die the death of the wicked
and may fire consume you to eternity!”</p>
<p class="c006">The words were intoned and not spoken for
the first time: the ritual of the ceremony was
established, and at definite points and intervals
the bystanders broke in with a mutter
of approval or warning—already traditional.</p>
<p class="c006">“First: you will swear, till death takes
you, to be our man against all perils and
enemies.”</p>
<p class="c006">“I will be your man till death takes me,”
swore Theodore, “against all perils and
enemies.”</p>
<p class="c006">“You are witness,” said the headman, looking
round, and was answered by a murmur
from the listeners. The women did not join
in it—they had, it seemed, no right of vote or
assent; but they had drawn near, every one
of them, and were peering at the ceremony
from beyond the shoulders of their men.</p>
<p class="c006">“And now,” came the order, “you will take
the oath to God, to purify your heart and
renounce devil’s knowledge—for yourself and
for those who come after you. Swear it after
me, word by holy word—and swear it with
your heart as with your lips.”</p>
<p class="c006">And word by word, and line by line, Theodore
<span class="pageno" id="Page_254">254</span>repeated the formula that cut him off from the
world of his youth and the heritage of all the
ages. It was a rhythmical formula, its phrasing
often Biblical; instinctively the prophet,
when he framed his new ritual, had followed
the music of the old.... Written pages and
the stonework of churches might perish, but
the word that was spoken endured....</p>
<p class="c006">“I do swear and take oath, before God and
before man, that I will walk humbly all my
days and put from me the pride of the intellect.
Remembering that the meek shall inherit the
earth and that the poor in spirit are acceptable
in the sight of the Most High. Therefore, I
do swear and take oath that I will purify my
heart of that which is forbidden, that I will
renounce and drive out all memory of the
learning which it is not meant for me, who
am sinful man, to know. What I know and
remember of that which is forbidden shall
be dead to me and as if it had never been
born.... May my hands be struck off before
I set them to the making of that which is forbidden;
and may blindness smite me if I seek
to pry into the hidden mysteries of God. Into
the secrets of the earth, into the secrets of the
air, the secrets of water or fire. For the Lord
our God is a jealous God and the secrets of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_255">255</span>earth, air, water and fire are sacred to Him
Who made them and must not be revealed to
sinners.... Therefore, I pray that my tongue
may rot in my mouth before I speak one word
that shall kindle the desire of others for that
which must not be revealed.</p>
<p class="c006">“I call upon the Lord Most High, Who
made heaven and earth and all that in them is,
to hear this oath that I have sworn; and, in
the day that I am false to it, I call on Him to
blast me with His utmost wrath.... And
I call upon my fellow-men to hear this oath
that I have sworn; may they shed my blood
without mercy, in the day that I am false to
it, by thought, word or deed. In the day that
I am false to it may they visit my sin on my
head; as I will visit their sin on man, woman
or child who, in my sight or in my hearing,
shall hanker after that which is forbidden.</p>
<p class="c006">“For so only shall we cleanse and purify our
hearts; so only shall we live without devil’s
knowledge and bring up our children without
it. That the land may have peace in our days
and that the wrath of the Most High may be
averted from us.</p>
<p class="c006">“So help me God. Amen.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Amen!” came back in a chorus from
the shadowy group on either hand; and when
<span class="pageno" id="Page_256">256</span>the echo of their voices had died in the night
the headman loosed Theodore’s hands.</p>
<p class="c006">He rose and looked round him on the faces
that were near enough to see—searched them
in the firelight for regret or a memory of the
past ... and, beyond and behind the ring of
stolid expressionless faces and the desert
silence, saw Markham toasting the centuries,
heard the moving thunder of a multitude and
the prayer of the Westminster bells....</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c008">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line">Lord—through—this—hour ...</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c006">The old man stretched out a hand in token
of comradeship admitted—and Theodore took
it mechanically.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_257">257</span>
<h2 class="c004">XX</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">With dawn Theodore and a stolid companion,
appointed by the headman, set out on their
journey to the camp where Ada awaited them.
They reached it only after weatherbound delays;
as they towed their boat against a
current that was almost too strong for their
paddling they were overtaken by a blinding
snowstorm and escaped from it barely with
their lives. They made fast their boat to the
stump of a tree and groped through the smother
to a shed near the river’s edge; and there, for
the better part of a day, they sheltered while
the storm lasted. When it moderated and
they pushed on through the dead village, a
thick sheet of snow had obliterated the minor
landmarks whereby Theodore had been wont
to guide his way. It was close upon sunset
on the third day of their journey when they
trudged into the hidden valley and the familiar
tree-clump came in sight—and dusk was
thickening into moonless dark when Ada,
hearing voices, ran forward with a scream of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_258">258</span>welcome. She sobbed and laughed incoherently
as she clung round her husband’s neck;
hysterical, perhaps near insanity, through
loneliness and the terror of loneliness.</p>
<p class="c006">In the intensity of her relief at the ending
of her ordeal she forgot, at first, to be greatly
disappointed because the world of Theodore’s
discovery was a world without a cinema or
<span lang="fr">char-à-banc</span>; with her craving for company, it
was sheer delight to know that in a few days
more she would be in the midst of some two
score human beings, whatever their manner of
living. It took time and explanation to make
her understand that the desire for <span lang="fr">char-à-banc</span>
and cinema must no longer be openly expressed;
she stared uncomprehendingly when
Theodore strove to make clear to her the religious,
as well as the practical, idea that lay
behind the prohibition.</p>
<p class="c006">The need for caution was the more urgent
since he had learned in the course of the return
journey that his appointed companion was a
fanatic in the new faith, a penitent who groaned
to his offended Deity; savagely pure-hearted
in the cult of ignorance and savagely suspicious
of the backslider.</p>
<p class="c006">The religious temperament was something
so far removed from Ada’s experience that he
<span class="pageno" id="Page_259">259</span>found it impossible at a first hearing to convince
her of the unknown danger of intolerant
and distorted faith. His mention of a religious
aspect to their new difficulties brought the
vague rejoinder that her mother was a Baptist
but her aunt had been married in a Catholic
church to an Irishman; and in the end he
gave up his attempt at explanation and
snapped out an order instead.</p>
<p class="c006">“You’re to be careful how you talk to them.
Until you get to know them, you’d better
say nothing about what you used to do in
the old times. Nothing at all—do you
hear?...”</p>
<p class="c006">She stared, uncomprehending, but realized
the order was an order. What she did
understand and tremble at was the lack of
provision for her coming ordeal of childbirth,
and there was a burst of loud weeping and
terrified protest when Theodore admitted, in
answer to her questions, that he had found no
trace of either hospitals, nurses or doctors.
For the time being he soothed her with a
hurried promise of seeking them further
afield—pushing on to find them (they were
sure to be found) when she was settled in
comfort and safety with other women to look
after her.... For the time being, he told
<span class="pageno" id="Page_260">260</span>himself, the soothing deceit was a necessity;
she would understand later—see for herself
what was possible—settle down and accept
the inevitable.</p>
<p class="c006">She was all eagerness to start, but it took
two full days before the requisite number of
journeys had been made to the river—their
stores packed on an improvised sled, dragged
heavily across the miles of frozen snow and
stowed in the flat-bottomed boat. Then, on
the third day, Ada herself made the journey;
helped along by the men who, when the ground
was smooth enough, set her on the sled and
dragged her. In spite of their help she needed
many halts for rest, and the distance between
camp and river took most of the hours of daylight
to accomplish; hence they sheltered
for the night in a cottage not far from the
river’s bank, and with morning dropped downstream
in the boat—paddling cautiously as
they rounded each bend and always on their
guard against the possibility of unfriendly
meetings. The long desolation they passed
through was a no-man’s land; any stray
hunter, therefore, might deem himself at
liberty to attack whom he saw and seize what
he found in their possession. But throughout
the short day was neither sight nor sound of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_261">261</span>man and by sunset the current, running
swollen and rapidly, had brought them to
their destined landing.... After that came
the mooring of the boat in the reeds and the
hiding, on the bank of the river, of the stores
they could not carry; then the long uphill
tramp over snow, in the gathering darkness—with
Ada shivering, crying from weariness
and clinging to her husband’s arm. And—at
last—the glow of fires, through tree-trunks;
with figures moving round them, shaggy men
and unkempt women.... Their home!</p>
<p class="c006">The unkempt women met their fellow not unkindly.
They drew her to the fire and rubbed
her frozen hands; then, while one brought a
bowl of steaming mess, another laid dry moss
and heather in the bed-place of her unfinished
dwelling. A protesting baby was wakened
from its sleep and dandled for her comfort and
inspection—its mother giving frank and loud-voiced
details concerning the manner of its
birth. There was a rough and good-natured
attempt to raise her drooping spirits, and Ada,
fed and warmed, brightened visibly and responded
to the clack of tongues. This, at
least, the new world had restored to her—the
blessing of loud voices raised in chatter....
All the same, on the second night of their new
<span class="pageno" id="Page_262">262</span>life Theodore, awake in the darkness, heard
her sniffing and swallowing her tears.</p>
<p class="c006">“What is it?” he asked and she clung to
him miserably and wept her forebodings on his
shoulder. Not only forebodings of her coming
ordeal in the absence of hospitals and doctors,
but—was this, in truth, to be the world?
These people—so they told her—knew of no
other existing; but what had become of all
the towns? The trams, the shops, the life of
the towns—her life—where was it? It must
be somewhere—a little way off—where was
it?... He soothed her with difficulty, repeating
his warnings on the danger of open
regrets for the past and reminding her that
to-morrow she also would be called on for the
oath.</p>
<p class="c006">“I know,” she whimpered. “Of course
I’ll taike an oath if I must. But you can’t
’elp thinking—if you swear yourself black in
the faice, you can’t ’elp thinking.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Whatever you think,” he insisted, “you
mustn’t say it—to anyone.”</p>
<p class="c006">“I know,” she snuffled obediently, “I
shan’t say nothing ... but, oh Gawd, oh
Gawd—aren’t we ever going to be ’appy
again?”</p>
<p class="c006">He knew what she was weeping for—shaking
<span class="pageno" id="Page_263">263</span>with miserable sobs; the evenings at the
pictures, the little bits of machine-made
finery, the petty products of “devil’s knowledge”
that had made up her daily life. The
cry to her “Gawd” was a prayer for the return
of these things and the hope of them had
so far sustained her in peril, hardship and loneliness.
Pictures and finery had always been
there, just a mile or two beyond the horizon—awaiting
her enjoyment so soon as it was safe
to reach them. Now, in her overpowering
misery and darkness of soul, she was facing
the dread possibility that they no longer
awaited her, that the horizon was immeasurable,
infinite.... Guns and bombs and
poisons—nobody wanted them and she understood
people making up their minds to do
without ’em. But the other things—you
couldn’t go on living without the other things—shops
and proper houses and railways....</p>
<p class="c006">“It can’t be for always,” she persisted,
“it can’t be”—and was cheered by the sudden
heat of his agreement, the sudden note of
protest in his voice. The knowledge that he
sympathized encouraged her and, with her
head on his shoulder, sniffing, but comforted,
she began to plan out their deliverance.</p>
<p class="c006">“They must be somewhere—the people
<span class="pageno" id="Page_264">264</span>that live like they used to. Keepin’ quiet, I
dessay, till things gets more settled. When
things is settled they’ll get a move on and
come along and find us. It stands to reason
they can’t be so very far off, because I remember
the teacher tellin’ us when we ’ad our
jography lesson that England’s quite a small
country. So they ’aven’t got so very far to
come.... I expect an aeroplane’ll come
first.”</p>
<p class="c006">He felt her thrill in expectation of the
moment when she sighted the swiftly moving
speck aloft, the bearer of deliverance drawing
nigh. Wouldn’t it be heavenly when they
saw one at last—after all these awful months
and years!... In the war they were beastly,
but, now that the war was over, what had
become of all the passenger ’planes and the
airships? She was always looking out for
one—always; every morning when she came
out of the hut the first thing she did was to
look up at the sky.... And some day one
was bound to come. When things had settled
down and got straight, it was bound to....</p>
<p class="c006">But it never did; and in the end she ceased
to look for it.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">His attempts—they were many in the first
<span class="pageno" id="Page_265">265</span>few years—to break away from his world and
his bondage of ignorance were made always
with cunning precaution and subterfuge; not
even the pitiable need of his wife would have
served as excuse for the backsliding which
was search after the forbidden. To a fanaticism
dominated by the masculine element the
pains of childbirth were once more an ordinance
of God; and when, a few weeks before
Ada’s time of trial, Theodore absented himself
from the camp for a night or two, he gave
no one (save Ada) warning of his journey, and
later accounted for his absence by a plausible
story of straying and a hunter’s misfortunes.
He had ceased, since he took up his dwelling
with the tribe, to believe in the neighbourhood
of a civilization in being; all he hoped for was
the neighbourhood, not too distant, of men
who had not acquiesced in ruin and put hope
of recovery behind them. What he sought
primarily was that aid and comfort in childbirth
for which his wife appealed to him with
insistence that grew daily more terrified;
what he sought fundamentally was escape
from a people vowed to ignorance.</p>
<p class="c006">The goal of his first journey was the town
lying lower down the river, the forbidden city
which had once bred pestilence and flies. He
<span class="pageno" id="Page_266">266</span>approached it deviously, keeping to the hills
and avoiding districts he knew to be inhabited;
hoping against hope, that, in spite of report,
he might find some rebuilding of a civic
existence and human life as he had known it....
What he found when he came down from
the foothills and trudged through its outskirts
was the customary silent desolation; a
desolation flooded and smelling of foul water—untenanted
streets that were channels and
backwaters, and others where the slime of
years lay thick and scum bred rank vegetation.</p>
<p class="c006">Silent streets and empty houses had long
been familiar to him, but until that day he
had not known how swiftly nature, left to
herself, could take hold of them. The river
and the life that sprang from it was overwhelming
what man had deserted. Three
winters of neglect in a low-lying, well-watered
country had wrought havoc with the work of
the farmer and the engineer; streams which
had been channelled and guided for centuries
had already burst their way back to freedom.
With every flooded winter more banks were
undermined, more channels silted up and
shifted; and that which had been ploughland,
copse or water-meadow was relapsing
into bog undrained. The valley above and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_267">267</span>below the town was a green swamp studded
with reedy little pools; a refuge for the waterbird
where a man would set foot at his peril.
Buildings here and there stood rotting, forlorn
and inaccessible—barns, sheds and farmhouses,
their walls leaning drunkenly as foundations
shifted in the mud; and in the town
itself, as surely, if more slowly, the waters
were taking possession.... Towns had vanished,
he knew—vanished so completely that
their very sites had been matter of dispute to
antiquarians—but never till to-day had he
visualized the process; the rising of layer on
layer of mud, the sapping of foundations by
water. The forces that made ruin and the
forces that buried it; flood and frost and the
persistent thrust of vegetation. As the waterlogged
ground slid beneath them, rows of
jerry-built houses were sagging and cracking
to their fall; here and there one had crumbled
and lay in a rubble heap, the water curdling at
its base.... How many life-times, he wondered,
till the river had the best of it and the
houses where men had gone out and in were
one and all of them a rubble heap—under
water and mud and rank greenery? He saw
them, decades or centuries ahead, as a waste,
a stretch of bogland where the river idled;
<span class="pageno" id="Page_268">268</span>bogland, now flooded, now drying and cracked
in the sun; and with broken green islets still
thrusting through the swamp—broken green
islets of moss-covered rock that underneath
was brick and mortar. In time it might be—with
more decades or centuries—the islets also
would sink lower in the swamp, disappear....</p>
<p class="c006">The process, unhindered, was certain as
sunrise; the important little streets that
humanity had built for its vanished needs and
its vanished business would be absorbed into
an indifferent wilderness, in all things sufficient
to itself. The rigid important little
streets had been no more than an episode in
the ceaseless life of the wilderness; an episode
ending in failure, to be decently buried and
forgotten.</p>
<p class="c006">He plodded aimlessly through street after
street that was fordable till the shell of a
“County Infirmary” mocked at Ada’s hopes
and recalled the first purpose of his journey;
a gaunt sodden building, the name yet visible
on walls that sweated fungi and mould. Then,
that he might leave nothing undone in the way
of help and search, he trudged and waded to
the lower outskirts of the town; where the
roads lost themselves in grass and flooded
water, and there stretched to the limit of his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_269">269</span>eyesight a dull winter landscape without sign
of living care or habitation. In the end—having
strained his eyes after that which was
not—he turned to slink back to his own place;
skirting alien territory where the sight of a
stranger might mean an alarm and a manhunt,
and sheltering at night where his fire
might be hidden from the watcher.</p>
<p class="c006">“You ’aven’t found nothin’?” Ada whimpered,
when he had told his necessary lies to
the curious and they were out of earshot in
their hut. Her eyes had grown piteous when
he stumbled in alone; she had dreamt in his
absence of sudden and miraculous deliverance—following
him in fancy through streets with
tramlines, where dwelt women who wore
corsets—also doctors. Who, perhaps, when
they knew the greatness of her need, would
send a motor-ambulance—to fetch her to a bed
with sheets on it.</p>
<p class="c006">“Nothing,” he told her almost roughly,
afraid to show pity. “No doctors, no houses
fit to live in. Wherever I’ve been and as far
as I could see—it’s like this.”</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_270">270</span>
<h2 class="c004">XXI</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">It was in the third spring after the Ruin of
Man that Ada’s time was accomplished and
she bore a son to her husband; on a day in
late April or early May there was going and
coming round the shelter that was Theodore’s
home. The elder women of the tribe, by
right of their experience, took possession, and
from early morning till long after nightfall
they busied themselves with the torment and
mystery of birth; and with the aid of nothing
but their rough and unskilled kindliness Ada
suffered and brought forth a squalling red
mannikin—the heir of the ages and their outcast.
The child lived and, despite its mother’s
fecklessness, was lusty; as a boy, ran shoeless,
and, in summer, naked as Adam; and grew
to his primitive manhood without letters,
knowing of the world that was past and gone
only legends derived from his elders.</p>
<p class="c006">His coming, to Theodore, meant more than
paternity; the birth of his son made him one
with the life of the tribe. By the child’s
<span class="pageno" id="Page_271">271</span>wants and helplessness—still more when other
children followed—his father was tied to an
existence which offered the necessary measure
of security; to the stretch of land where he
had the right to hunt unmolested, the patch
he had the right to sow and reap, and the
company of those who would aid him in protecting
his children. He had given his hostages
to fortune and the limits set to his secret
expeditions in search of a lost world were the
limits set by the needs of those dependent on
him, by his fear of leaving them too long unprotected,
unprovided for.</p>
<p class="c006">He learned much from his firstborn and the
brothers and sisters who followed him; not
only the intimate lore of his fatherhood, but
the lore and outlook of man bred uncivilized,
and the traditions, in making, of a world to
come—which in all things would resemble the
old traditions handed down by a world that
had died. His children lived naturally the
life that had been forced upon their father and
inherited ignorance as a birthright; growing
up—such as lived through the perils of childhood—without
knowledge of the past and
untempted by the sin of the intellect. The
oath which Theodore, like every new-made
father, was called on to swear in the name
<span class="pageno" id="Page_272">272</span>of the child he had given to the tribe, had a
meaning to those who had lived through Disaster
and witnessed the Ruin of Man; to
the next generation the vow was a formula
only, a renunciation of that they had never
possessed. They could not, if they would,
instruct their children in the secrets of God,
the forbidden lore of the intellect.</p>
<p class="c006">By the time his first son was of an age to
think and question, Theodore understood more
than the growth and workings of a child-mind—much
that had hitherto seemed dark and
fantastic in the origins of a world that had
ended with the Ruin of Man. It was the
workings of a child-mind that made oddly
clear to him the significance of primitive religious
doctrine and beliefs handed down through
the ages—the once meaningless doctrine of the
Fall of Man and the belief in a vanished Golden
Age. These the boy, unprompted, evolved
from his own knowledge and the talk of his
elders, accepting them spontaneously and
naturally.</p>
<p class="c006">In Theodore’s childhood the Golden Age
had been a myth and pleasant fancy of the
ancients, and the Fall of Man as distant as the
Book of Genesis and unreal as the tale of Puss-in-Boots;
to his children, one and all, the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_273">273</span>legends of his infancy were close and undoubted
realities. The Golden Age was a wondrous
condition of yesterday; the Fall—the Ruin—its
catastrophic overthrow, an experience
their father had survived. The fields and
hillsides where they worked, played and
wandered were still littered with strange
relics of the Golden Age—the vanished,
fruitful, incomprehensible world whence their
parents had been cast into the outer darkness
of everyday hardship as a penalty for the sin
of mankind. The sin unforgivable of grasping
at the knowledge which had made them like
unto gods; a mad ambition which not only
they but their children’s children must atone
for in the sweat of their brow.... More than
once Theodore suspected in the secret recesses
of his youngsters’ minds a natural and wondering
contempt for the men of the last generation;
the fools and blind who had overreached
themselves and forfeited the splendour of the
Golden Age by their blundering greed and
unwisdom. So history was writing itself in
their minds; making of a race that had acquiesced
in science and drifted to destruction
a legendary people whose sin was deliberate—a
people whose encroachments had angered
a self-important Deity and brought down his
<span class="pageno" id="Page_274">274</span>wrath upon their heads. It was a history
inseparable from religious belief; its opening
chapters identical in all essentials with the
legendary history of an epoch that had ceased
to exist.</p>
<p class="c006">Once his eight-year boy, planted sturdily
before him, demanded a plain explanation of
the folly of his father’s contemporaries.</p>
<p class="c006">“Why,” he asked frowning, “did the people
want to find out God’s secrets?”</p>
<p class="c006">Theodore thought of Ada and the countless
millions like her, leaned his chin on his hand
and smiled grimly.</p>
<p class="c006">“Some of us didn’t,” he answered. “Some
of us—many of us—had no interest in the
secrets of God. We made use of them when
others found them out, but we, ourselves, were
quite content to be ignorant. Ignorant in all
things.”</p>
<p class="c006">“I know,” the child assented, puzzled by
his father’s smile. “The good ones didn’t
want to—the good ones like you and Mummy.
But the others—all the wicked ones—why did
they? It was stupid of them.”</p>
<p class="c006">“They wanted to find out,” said Theodore,
“and there have always been people like that.
From the beginning, the very beginning of
things—ever since there were men on the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_275">275</span>earth. The desire to know burned them like
a fire. There is an old story of a woman who
brought great trouble into the world because
she wanted to know. She was given a box
and told never to open it; but she disobeyed
because she was filled with a great curiosity
to know what had been put inside it. Her
longing tormented her night and day and she
could think of nothing else; till at last she
opened the box and horrible creatures flew
out.”</p>
<p class="c006">The boy, interested, demanded more of
Pandora and the horrible creatures. “Is it
a true story?” he asked when his father had
given such further details as he managed to
remember and invent.</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” Theodore told him, “I believe it is
a true story. It was so long ago that we cannot
tell exactly how it happened: I may not
have told it you quite rightly, but on the whole
it is a true story.... And the wicked people—our
wicked people who brought ruin on the
world—were much like Pandora and her box.
It was the same thing over again; they wanted
to know so strongly that they forgot everything
else; they had only the longing to find
out and it seemed as if nothing else mattered.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Weren’t they afraid?” the boy asked
<span class="pageno" id="Page_276">276</span>doubtfully, still puzzled by his father’s odd
smile. “Afraid of what would happen to
them?”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” Theodore answered. “Until it was
too late and they saw what they had done, I
don’t think many were afraid. Here and
there, before the end, some began to be
frightened, but most of them didn’t see where
they were going.”</p>
<p class="c006">“But they must have known,” his son
insisted, frowning. “God told them He would
punish them if they tried to learn His secrets.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” Theodore assented—with the orthodox
truth, more deceptive than a lie, that
meant one thing to him and another to the
world barbarian. “Yes, God told them so;
but though He said it very plainly not many
of them understood....” They were talking,
he knew, across more than the gulf
between the mind of a child and a man;
between them lay the centuries, the barrier
of many generations. To his son, now and
always, dead and gone chemists and mathematicians
must appear in the likeness of present
evildoers—raiders of the territory and robbers
of the property of God; to his son, now and
always, inventors and spectacled professors
in mortar-boards would be greedy, foolish
<span class="pageno" id="Page_277">277</span>chieftains who planned war against Heaven
as a tribe plans assault upon its rivals. These
were and must always be his “wicked,” his
destroyers of the Golden Age; his life and
outlook being what it was, how should he
picture the war against Heaven as pure-hearted,
instinctive and unconscious?</p>
<p class="c006">“Why not?” the child persisted, repeating
the question when his father stroked his head
absently.</p>
<p class="c006">“Because ... they did not know themselves.
If they had known themselves and
their own passions they would have seen why
knowledge was forbidden.”</p>
<p class="c006">“Yes,” said the child vaguely—and passed
to the matter that interested him.</p>
<p class="c006">“Why didn’t the others make them understand?
You and the other good ones?”</p>
<p class="c006">“Because,” said Theodore, “we ourselves
didn’t understand. That was the blunder—the
sin—of the rest of us. We didn’t seek
after knowledge, but we took the fruits of
other men’s knowledge and ate.”</p>
<p class="c006">(Unconsciously he made use of the familiar
hereditary simile.)</p>
<p class="c006">“I’d have killed them,” his son declared
firmly. “Every one. I’d have told them to
stop, and then, if they wouldn’t, I’d have
<span class="pageno" id="Page_278">278</span>killed them. Thrown them in the river—or
hammered them with stones till they died.
That’s what I’d have done.”</p>
<p class="c006">“No,” Theodore told him, “you wouldn’t
have killed them.... One of them said the
same thing to me—one of the wicked ones.
He said we should have stamped out the race
of them. Afterwards I knew he was right,
but at the time I didn’t understand. I
couldn’t. I heard what he said, but the words
had no real meaning for me.”</p>
<p class="c006">He saw something that was almost contempt
in his son’s eyes and took the grubby face
between his hands.</p>
<p class="c006">“That same wicked man—who was also
very wise—told me something else that is as
true for you as it was for me; he said that we
never know anything except through our
own experience. I might tell you that the
sun is warm or the water is cold, but if you
had never felt the heat of the sun or the cold
of the water you would not know what I
meant. And it was like that with us; there
were always some few who understood that
knowledge was a flame that, in the end, would
burn us—but the rest of us couldn’t even try
to save ourselves until after we were burned.”</p>
<p class="c006">He stroked the grubby face as he released it.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_279">279</span>“That’s the Law, son; and all that matters
you’ll learn that way. That way and no
other—just as we did.”</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">In time he found himself recalling, with
strange interest, the fairy-tales of his childhood;
he spent long hours re-weaving and
piecing them together, searching his memory
for half-remembered fragments of what had
once seemed fantasy or nonsense invented for
the nursery. The hobgoblins and heroes of
his nursery days were transformed and made
suddenly possible; looking through the mind
of a new generation, he saw that they might
have been as human and prosaic as himself.
More—he came to know that he and his commonplace,
civilized contemporaries would be
the heroes and hobgoblins of the future.</p>
<p class="c006">The process, the odd transformation, would
be simple as it was inevitable. It was forbidden,
by the spirit and letter of the Vow, to
awaken youthful curiosity concerning the past—youthful
curiosity whose end might be
youthful experiment; but women, in spite
of all vows and prohibitions, would gossip
to each other of their memories. While they
talked their children would listen, open-eyed
and puzzled; and when a youngster demanded
<span class="pageno" id="Page_280">280</span>the meaning of an unfamiliar term
or impossible happening, the explanation,
as a matter of course, took the form of
analogy, of comparison with the known and
familiar. The aeroplane was a bird extinct
and monstrous—larger, many times larger,
than the flapping heron or the owl; the bomb
was more dreadful than a lightning stroke;
the tram, train or motor a gigantic wheelbarrow
that ran without man or beast to drag
it.... The ignorance of science of those who
told, the yet greater ignorance of those who
heard, resulted, inevitably, before many years
had passed, in myth and religious legend—an
outwardly fantastic statement of actual fact
and truth. The children, piecing together
their fragments of incomprehensible information,
made their own image of the past—to be
handed on later to their sons; an image of
a world fantastic, enchanted and amazing,
destroyed, as a judgment for sin against God,
by strange, fire-breathing beasts and bolts
from heaven. A world of gigantic fauna and
bewitched chariots; likewise of sorcerers,
their masters—whom God and the righteous
had exterminated.... So Theodore realized—as
his children grew and he heard them talk—must
a race that knew nothing of science
<span class="pageno" id="Page_281">281</span>explain the dead wonders of science; from the
message that flashes round the world in
seconds to the petrol-engine and the magic
slumber of chloroform. That which is outside
the power and beyond the understanding
of man has always been denounced as magic;
and steam, electricity, chemical action, were
outside the power and beyond the understanding
of men born after the Ruin. In
default of understanding they must needs fall
back on a wizardry known to their fathers; thus
he and his contemporaries to their children’s
children would be semi-supernatural beings,
fit comrades of Sindbad, of Perseus, or the
Quatre Fils Aymon: giants with great voices
that called to each other across continents and
vasty deeps; possessors of seven-league boots,
magic steeds and flying carpets—of all the
stock-in-trade of the fairy-tale.... Belief
in the demi-god was a natural growth and
product of the world wherein his son grew to
manhood.</p>
<p class="c006">Given time and black ignorance of mechanics
and science, and the engineer would be
promoted to a giant or demi-god; who, by virtue
of a strength that was more than human,
dammed rivers, drained bogs and pierced
mountains. “As it was in the beginning, is
<span class="pageno" id="Page_282">282</span>now and ever shall be”—and always in the past
there had been giants. Titans—and Hercules,
removing mighty obstacles and cleansing the
stables of Augeas. He came to understand
that all wonders were facts misinterpreted and
that (given time and ignorance) a post-office
underling, tapping out his Morse code, might
be seen as a geni or an Oberon—the absolute
master of obedient sprites who could lay their
girdles round the earth; and he pictured a
college-bred, sober-suited Hercules planning
his Labours in the office of a limited company—jotting
down figures, estimating costs and
scanning the reports of geologists. Figures
and reports, like his tunnels and dams, would
pass into the limbo of science forgotten and
forbidden, but the memory of his labours, his
defiance of brute nature, would live on as the
story of a demi-god; and the childhood that
was barbarism would explain his achievements
by a giant strength that could tear down trees
and move mountains.</p>
<p class="c006">The idea took fast root and grew in him—the
idea of a world that, time and again, had
returned to the helplessness of childhood. He
saw science as the burden that, time and again,
the race found intolerable; as Dead-Sea fruit
that turned to ashes in the mouth, as riches
<span class="pageno" id="Page_283">283</span>that humanity strove for, attained and renounced—renounced
because it dared not
keep them. In his hours of dreaming he made
fairies and demi-gods out of dapper little
sedentary persons, the senders of forgotten
telegrams, with forgotten engines—motor-cars
and aeroplanes—at their insignificant command;
and once, in the night, when Ada
snored beside him, he asked himself if Lucifer,
Son of the Morning—Lucifer who strove with
his God and was worsted—were more, in his
beginnings, than a scientist intent on his work?
A chemist, a spectacled professor, resplendent
only in degrees and learning? An Archfiend of
Knowledge who had sinned against God in the
secret places of a laboratory and not upon the
shining plains of Heaven? And whom ignorance
and time had glorified into the Tempter,
the Evil One—setting him magnificently in
the flaming Hell which he and his like, by
their skill and patience, had created and let
loose upon man?... This, at least, was
certain; that in years to come and under
other names, his children’s children would retell
the story of Lucifer, Son of the Morning;
the Enemy of Man who was flung out of Heaven
because, in his overweening vanity, he encroached
on the power of a God.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_284">284</span>It was the new world that taught him that
man invents nothing, is incapable of pure
invention; that what seem his wildest, most
fantastic imaginings are no more than ineffective,
distorted attempts to set down a half-forgotten
experience. What had once appeared
prophecies he saw to be memories; the
Day of Judgment, when the heavens should
flame and men call upon the rocks to cover
them, belonged to the past before it belonged
to the future. The forecast of its terrors was
possible only to a people that had known them
as realities; a people troubled by a dim race-memory
of the conquest of the air and catastrophe
hurled from the skies....</p>
<p class="c006">So, at least, his children taught him to
believe.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_285">285</span>
<h2 class="c004">XXII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">With years and rough husbandry the resources
of the tribe were augmented and it
emerged from its first starved misery; more
land was brought under cultivation and, as
tillage improved and better crops were raised,
the little community was less dependent on the
haphazard luck of its fishing and snaring and
lived further from the line of utter want.
While, save in bad seasons, the inter-tribal
raiding that was caused by sheer starvation
was less frequent. Even so, strife was frequent
enough—small intermittent feud that
flared now and again into savagery; the desire
of a growing community to extend its
hunting-grounds at the expense of a neighbour
meant, almost inevitably, appeal to the right
of the strongest. Other quarrels had their
origin in the border inroads and reprisals of
poachers or a barbaric setting of the eternal
story that was old when Helen launched a
thousand ships.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_286">286</span>With husbandry, even rough husbandry,
came the small beginnings of commerce, the
barter and exchange of one man’s superfluities
for the produce of another man’s fields. Cold
and nakedness stimulated ingenuity in the
matter of clothing, even in a society whose
original members had in large part been bred
to depend in all things on the aid of the machine
and to earn a livelihood by the performance of
one action only—the tending of one lathe, the
accomplishment of one stereotyped mechanical
process. Outcasts of civilization flung
into the world of savagery, they had in the
beginning none of the adaptability and none
of the resources of the savage—knew nothing
of the properties of unfamiliar plants, knew
neither what to weave nor how to weave it,
and often from sheer lack of understanding,
starved and shivered in the midst of plenty.
It was not till they had suffered long and
intolerably that they learned to clothe themselves
from such material as their new world
afforded, to cure skins of animals and stitch
them together into garments. In the first
years of ruin only ratskins were plentiful;
but, as time went on, rabbits, cats and wild
dogs multiplied and, spreading through the
countryside, were trapped and hunted for
<span class="pageno" id="Page_287">287</span>their flesh and the warmth of their skins. The
dogs, as they bred, reverted to a mongrel and
wolf-like type which, in summer, preyed
largely on vermin; in winter, when scarcity
of food made them bold, they prowled in
packs, were a danger to the solitary and a
legendary terror to children.</p>
<p class="c006">In the beginning the village was a straggle
of rude huts, the tribesmen building how and
where they would; later it took shape within
its first wall and was roughly circular, enclosed
by a fence of stake and thornbush. The
raising of the fence was a sign and result of
the beginning of primitive competition in
armament; it was the knowledge that one
village had fortified itself that set others to
the driving in of stakes. One November
evening Theodore, trudging in with his catch,
saw a group round the headman’s fire; the
centre of interest, a youth who had returned
from poaching on other men’s land and brought
back news of their doings. His trespassing
had taken him within sight of the neighbouring
village—which lately was a cluster of huts,
like their own, and now was surrounded by a
wall. A stockade, fully the height of a man,
with only one gap for a gate.... The
poacher’s news was discussed with uneasy
<span class="pageno" id="Page_288">288</span>interest. The fortified tribe, in point of
numbers, was already stronger than its rival;
if it added this new advantage to its numbers,
what was there to prevent it from raiding and
robbing as it would? Having raided and
robbed, it could shelter behind its defences—beat
off attack, make sorties and master the
countryside! Its security meant the insecurity
of others, the dependence of others on its
goodwill and neighbourly honesty; the issue
was as plain to the handful of tribesmen as to
old-time nations competing in battleships,
aeroplanes and guns, and the suspicions
muttered round the headman’s fire were the
raw material of arguments once familiar in the
councils of emperors.</p>
<p class="c006">In the end, as the result of uneasy discussion,
Theodore and another were dispatched to spy
out the new menace, to get as near as they
might to the wall, ascertain its strength and
the method of its building; and with their
return from a night expedition there was more
consultation and a hurried planning of defences.
Before winter was over the haphazard
settlement was a compound, a walled town in
embryo; within the narrow limits of a circle
small enough for a handful of men to defend
all huts were crowded, all provisions stored,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_289">289</span>all animals driven at sunset—so that, in case
of night attack, no man could be cut off and
the strength of the tribe be at hand to resist
the assailants. With waste, healthy miles
stretching out on either side, the village itself
was an evil-smelling huddle of cabins; since
a short stretch of wall was easier to defend
than a long, men and beasts were crowded
together in a foulness that made for security.
In times of feud—and times of feud were
seldom distant—stones were heaped beside the
barrier, in readiness to serve as missiles, watch
and ward was kept turn and turn by the able-bodied
and—naturally, inevitably and almost
unconsciously—there was evolved a system of
military discipline, of penalty for mutiny and
cowardice.</p>
<p class="c006">As in every social system from the beginning
of time, the community was welded to a conscious
whole not by the love its members bore
to each other, but by hatred and fear of the
outsider; it was the enemy, the urgent
common need to be saved from him, that made
of man a comrade and a citizen; the peril
from outside was the natural antidote to
everyday hatreds and the ceaseless bickerings
of close neighbours. The instinctive politics
of a squalid village were in miniature the policy
<span class="pageno" id="Page_290">290</span>of vanished nations, and untraditioned little
headmen, like dead and gone kings, quelled
internal feuds by diverting attention to the
danger that threatened from abroad. The
foundations of community life in the new world,
like the foundations of community life in the
old, were laid in the selfishness of fear; but for
all its base origin the life of the community imposed
upon its members the essential virtues of
the soldier and citizen, a measure of discipline
and sacrifice. From these, in time, would
grow loyalty and pride in sacrifice; the enclosure
of ramshackle huts and pens was breaking
its savages to achievements undreamed
of and virtues as yet beyond their ken; the
blind, stubborn instincts that created Babylon—created
London and Rome and destroyed
them—were laying well and truly in a mud-walled
compound the foundations of cities
which should rise, flourish, perish in the stead
of London and of Rome.</p>
<p class="c006">Outside the little fortress with its noisome
huddle of sheds and shelters lay a belt of
ploughed land, of patches scraped and sown,
where the women worked by the side of their
men and worked alone when their men were
gone hunting or fishing. One or two members
of the tribe who were countrymen born were
<span class="pageno" id="Page_291">291</span>its saviours in its first years of leanness,
imparting their knowledge of soil and seed to
their unskilled comrades bred in towns; and,
by slow degrees, as the lesson was learned, the
belt of tilled ground grew wider and more
fertile, the little community more prosperous.</p>
<p class="c006">As families grew and the tribe settled down
the makeshift shelters of wood and moss were
succeeded by stronger and better built cabins;
by the time that her second child was born
Ada was established in a weatherproof hut—a
mud-walled building, roofed with dried
grass and with a floor of earth beaten hard.
In its early years it possessed a glazed window,
a pane which Theodore had found whole in a
crumbling house and set immovably in an
aperture cut in his wall. But, as years went
on, unbroken glass was hard to come by; and
there came a day when the window-aperture,
no longer glazed, was plastered up to keep out
the weather.</p>
<p class="c006">Long before he set about the building of his
cabin Theodore had brought a strip of ground
under cultivation, sown a patch of potatoes
and straggling beans which, in time, expanded
to a field. His life, henceforth, was largely
the anxious life of the seasons; the sowing and
tending and reaping of his crop, the struggle
<span class="pageno" id="Page_292">292</span>with the soil and the barrenness thereof, the
ceaseless war against vermin.... He ended
rich, as the men of his time counted riches;
the possessor of goats, the owner of land which
other men envied him, the father of sons who
could till it. The new world gave him what it
had to give; and gradually, with the passing
of years, the hope of life civilized died in him
and he ceased to strain his eyes at the distance.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">It was slowly, very slowly, that hope died in
him; but there came a day when, searching
the skyline, as his habit was, it dawned on his
mind that he sought automatically; it was
habit only that made him lift his eyes to the
horizon. He expected nothing when he shaded
his eyes and looked this way and that; his
belief in a world that was lettered and civilized
had vanished. If that world yet existed,
remote and apart, of a surety it was not for
him—who perhaps was no longer capable of
existence lettered and civilized. And if he
himself could be broken to its decencies, what
place had his children, his young barbarians,
in an ordered atmosphere like that of his
impossible youth? They belonged to their
world, to its squalor, its dirt, its rude ignorance ... as, it might be, he also belonged.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_293">293</span>At the thought, he knelt and stared into the
water, taking stock of the image it reflected
and coming face to face with himself. His
body and habits had adapted themselves to
their surroundings, his mind to the outlook
of his world—to his daily, yearly struggle with
the soil and vermin and his fellows. His relations
with his fellows—with women—with
himself—were not those of humanity civilized;
it was nothing to him to go foul and unwashed
or to clench his fist against his wife. Could
he live the life he had been born and bred to,
of cleanliness, self-control and courtesy? Or
had he been stripped of the decencies which go
to make civilized man?... He covered his
face with his broken-nailed fingers and strove
with God and his own soul that he might not
fall utterly to ruin with his world, that some
remnant might remain of his heritage.</p>
<p class="c006">From the day when he saw himself for what
he was and resigned all hope of the world of
his youth, it seemed to him that he lived two
divergent lives. One absorbed, perforce, in
his digging and snaring, in the daily struggle,
for the daily wants of his household; the
other—in his hours of summer rest, in the long
dark winter evenings—an inward life of brooding
that concerned itself only with the past.
<span class="pageno" id="Page_294">294</span>His memories became to him a species of cult,
a secret ceremonial and a rite; that which
had been (so he fancied) was not altogether
waste, not altogether dead, so long as one man
thought of it with reverence. When the mood
took him he would sit for long hours with his
chin on his hand, staring at the fire while the
children wondered at his silence—and Ada,
wearied of talking to deaf ears, flung off to
gossip with the neighbours.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">She, before she was thirty, was a haggard
slattern of a woman; pitiable by reason of
her discontent, and looking far older than her
years. Childbearing aged her and the field-work
she hated—the bent-backed drudgery
she tried in vain to shirk and to which she
brought no shred of understanding; even
more she was aged by the weary desire that
sulked in the corners of her mouth. Before
she lost her comeliness she had more than once
sought distraction from her dullness in clumsy
flirtation; which perhaps was no more than
silly ogling and nudging and perhaps led to
actual unfaithfulness. Theodore—not greatly
interested in his wife’s doings—ignored the
danger to his household peace until it was
forcibly thrust upon his notice by a jealous
<span class="pageno" id="Page_295">295</span>spitfire who cursed Ada for running after other
women’s husbands, and proceeded to tear out
her hair. Ada’s snuffling protestations when
the spitfire was pulled off did not savour of
injured innocence; he judged her guilty, at
least in thought, cuffed her soundly and from
that time kept his eye on her. He was not (as
she liked to think) jealous—salving her bruises
with the comforting balm that two males were
disputing the possession of her body; what
stirred him to wrath fundamentally was his
outraged sense of property in Ada, his woman,
and the possibility that her lightness might
entail on him the labour of supporting another
man’s child. The intrigue—if intrigue it were—ended
on the day of the cuffing and hairpulling;
her Lothario, awed by his spitfire
or unwilling to tackle an outraged husband,
avoided her company from that day forth and
Ada sank back to domesticity.</p>
<p class="c006">She, too, in the end accepted the loss of the
world that had made her what she was, ceased
to search the horizon and strain her eyes for the
deliverer; whereupon—having nothing to
aim at or hope for—she lapsed into slovenly
neglect of her home, alternating hours of clack
and gossip with fits of sullen complaining at
the daily misery of existence.</p>
<p class="c006"><span class="pageno" id="Page_296">296</span>Had destiny realized the dreams of her
youth and set her to live out her married life
in a shoddy little villa with bamboo furniture,
she might have made a tolerable mother; she
would at least have taken pride in the looks of
her children, have dressed them with interest,
as she dressed herself, and tied up their hair
with satin bows. Being what she was, she
could take no pride in ragamuffins who ran
half the year naked; she could see no beauty,
even, in straight agile limbs which were meant
to be encased in reach-me-down suits or cheap
costumes of cotton velveteen. Thus her
naked little ragamuffins—those of them that
lived—were apt to be dirtier, less cared-for,
than the run of the dirty village youngsters.
Theodore, in whom the instinct of fatherhood
was strong, was sometimes roused to wrath
by her stupid mishandling of her children; but,
on the whole he was patient with her—knowing
it useless to be otherwise. He beat her
as seldom as possible and she was looked on by
her neighbours as a woman kindly handled and
unduly blessed in her husband. To the end
she remained what she had always been;
essentially a parasite, a minor product of
civilization, machine-bred and crowd-developed—bewildered
by a life not lived in crowds
<span class="pageno" id="Page_297">297</span>and not subject to the laws of the Machine.
To the end all nature was alien and hateful to
her—raw life that she turned from with disgust....
In her last illness her mind, when
it wandered, strayed back into the world
where she belonged; Theodore, an hour before
she died, heard her muttering of “last Bank
’Oliday.”</p>
<p class="c006">She died at the end of a long hard winter
during which she had failed and complained
unceasingly, sat huddled to the fire and grown
weaker; creeping, at last, to her straw in the
corner and forgetting, in delirium, the meaningless
life she had shared with her husband
and children. Death smoothed out the lines
in her sullen face; it was peaceful, almost
comely, when Theodore looked his last on it—and
wondered, oddly, if among the “many
mansions,” were some Cockney paradise of
noise and jostle where his wife had found her
heart’s desire?</p>
<p class="c006">Of the four or five children she had brought
into the world but two were living on the day
of her death, her eldest-born and a youngster
at the crawling stage; but the care of even
two children was a burdensome matter for a
man unaided, and it was esteemed natural and
no insult to the dead, that Theodore should
<span class="pageno" id="Page_298">298</span>take another wife as speedily as might be—in
the course not of months but of weeks. He
found a woman to suit his needs without going
further than his own tribe; a woman left
widowed a year or two before, who was glad
enough to accept the offer of a better living than
she could hope to make by her own scratching
of a rod or two of earth and the uncertain
charity of neighbours. The proposal of
marriage, made in stolid fashion, was accepted
as a matter of course ... and, that night,
Theodore stared through the fire into a room
in Westminster where a girl in a yellow dress
made music ... and a young man listened
from the corner of a sofa with a cigarette,
unlit, between his fingers. He was dreaming
at a table—with silver and branching yellow
roses—when his son nudged him that supper
was ready, and he dipped his hand into a
greasy bowl for the meat.</p>
<p class="c006">The wedding followed swiftly on the heels
of betrothal, and was celebrated in the manner
already compulsory and established; by a
public promise made solemnly before the
headman, by a clasping of hands and a ceremony
of religious blessing. This last was
moulded, like all tribal ceremonies, on remembered
formulæ and ritual; and the tradition
<span class="pageno" id="Page_299">299</span>that a wedding should be accompanied by
much eating and general merrymaking was
also faithfully observed.</p>
<p class="c006">The new wife, if not over comely or intelligent,
was a sturdy young woman who had
been broken to the duties required of her, and
Theodore’s home, under its second mistress,
was better tended and more comfortable than
in the days of her sluttish predecessor. He
had married her simply as a matter of business,
that she might help in his field-work, cook his
food, look after his children and satisfy his
animal desire; and on the whole he had no
reason to complain of the bargain he had made.
She was a younger woman than Ada by some
years—had been only a slip of a girl at the
time of the Ruin—and, because of her youth,
had adapted herself more readily than most
of her elders to a world in the making and
untraditioned methods of living. Her husband
found life easier for the help of a pair of
sturdy arms and pleasanter for lack of Ada’s
grumbling.... She brought more than herself
to Theodore’s household—a child by her
first husband; and, as time went on, she bore
him other children of his own.</p>
<div class="chapter">
<span class="pageno" id="Page_300">300</span>
<h2 class="c004">XXIII</h2>
</div>
<p class="c005">As the years went by and his children grew
to manhood in the world primitive which was
the only world they knew, the life of Theodore
Savage became definitely twofold; a life of
the body in the present and a life of the mind
in the past. There was his outward, rustic
and daily self, the labourer, hunter and fisherman,
who begat sons and daughters, who
trudged home at nightfall to eat and sleep
heavily, who occasionally cudgelled his wife: a
sweating, muscular animal man whose existence
was bounded by his bodily needs and the
bodily needs of his children; who fondled his
children and cuffed them by turns, as the
beast cuffs and fondles its offspring. Whose
world was the world of a food-patch enclosed
in a valley, of a river where he fished, a wood
where he snared and a hut that received him
at evening.... In time it was of these things,
and these things only, that he spoke to his kin
<span class="pageno" id="Page_301">301</span>and his neighbours; the weather, the luck of
his hunting or fishing, the loves, births and
deaths of his fellows. With the rise and
growth of a generation that knew only the
world primitive, the little community lived
more in the present and less in the past; mention
of the world that had vanished was even
less frequent and even more furtive than
before.</p>
<p class="c006">And even if that had not been the case, there
was no man in the tribe, save Theodore, whose
mind was the mind of a student; thus his
other life, his life of the past, was lived to
himself alone. It was a vivid memory-life in
which he delved, turning over its vanished
treasures—the intangible treasures of dead
beauty, dead literature, learning and art; a
life that at times receded to a dream of the
impossible and at others was so real and overwhelming
in its nearness that the everyday
sweating and toiling and lusting grew vague
and misty—was a veil drawn over reality.</p>
<p class="c006">Sometimes the two lives clashed suddenly
and oddly—to the wonder of those who saw
him. As on the day when his wife had burned
the evening mess and, raising his hand to
chastise her carelessness, there flashed before
his eyes, without warning, a vision of Phillida
<span class="pageno" id="Page_302">302</span>bent delicately over her piano.... Not only
Phillida, but the room, her surroundings;
every detail clear to him and the loveliness
of Chopin in his ears.... Furniture, hangings,
a Louis Seize clock and a Hogarth print—and
swiftly-seen objects whose very names he had
forgotten, so long was it since he had made use
of the household words that once described
them. The dead world caught him back to
itself and claimed him; in the face of its
reality the present faded, the burned stew
mattered not and his hand dropped slack to
his side; while his wife’s mouth, open for a
wailing protest, hung open in gratified astonishment.
He stared through the open door of
the hut, not seeing the tufted trees beyond
it or the curving skyline of the hills; then,
taking mechanically his stout wooden spoon,
he shovelled down his portion without tasting
it. In his ears, like a song, was the varied
speech of other days; of art, of daily mechanics,
of books, of daily politics, of learning....
Phillida, her curved hands touching the keys,
gave place to the eager, bespectacled face of a
scholar who had tried to make clear to him
the rhythm and beauty of French verse. He
had forgotten the man’s name—long forgotten
it—but from some odd crevice in his brain a
<span class="pageno" id="Page_303">303</span>voice came echoing down the years, caressing
the lines as it quoted them:—</p>
<div class="lg-container-b c008">
<div class="linegroup">
<div class="group">
<div class="line"><span lang="co">O Corse à cheveux plats, que la France était belle</span></div>
<div class="line"><span lang="co">Au soleil de Messidor!</span></div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p class="c006">His own lips framed the words involuntarily,
attempting the accent long unheard. “Au
soleil de Messidor, au soleil de Messidor” ...
and his wife and children stared after him as,
thrusting the half-eaten bowl aside, he rose
and went out, muttering gibberish. They
were not unused to these fits in the house-father,
to the change in his eyes, the sudden forgetting
of their presence; but never lost their fear
of them as something uncanny and inexplicable.</p>
<p class="c006">With these masterful rushes of the past
came often an infinite melancholy; which
was not so much a regret for what had been as
a sense of the pity of oblivion. So that he
would lie outstretched with his face to the
earth, rebellious at the thought that with him
and a few of his own generation must pass all
knowledge of human achievement, the very
memory of that which had once been glorious.... Not only the memory of actual men whose
fame had once been blown about the world;
but the memory of sound, of music, and of
<span class="pageno" id="Page_304">304</span>marvels in stone, uplifted by the skill of
generations; the memory of systems, customs,
laws, wrought wisely by the hand of experience;
and of fanciful people, more real than
living men and women. With him and his
like would pass not only Leonardo, Cæsar and
the sun of Messidor, but Rosalind, d’Artagnan
and Faust; the heroes, the merrymen, the
women loved and loving who, created of
dreams, had shared the dead world with their
fellows created of dust.... Once deemed
immortal, they had been slain by science as
surely as their fellows of dust.</p>
<p class="c006">At times he pondered vaguely whether he
might not save the memory of some of them
alive by teaching his children to love them;
but in the end he realized that, as we grasp
nothing save through ourselves and our own
relation to it, the embodied desires and beauty
of an inconceivable age would be meaningless
to his young barbarians.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">If he ceased to believe in the survival of
life as he had known it and a civilization that
would reach out and claim him, there were
times when he believed, or almost believed,
that somewhere in the vastness of the great
round world a remnant must hold fast to its
<span class="pageno" id="Page_305">305</span>inheritance; when it was inconceivable that
all men living could be sunk in brutishness or
vowed to the creed of utter ignorance. Hunger
and blind terror—(he knew, for he had seen it)—could
reduce the highest to the level of the
beast; but with the passing of terror and the
satisfaction of the actual needs of the body,
there awakens the hunger of the mind.
Somewhere in the vastness of the great, round
world must be those who, because they craved
for more than full stomachs and daily security,
still clung to the power which is knowledge.
Little groups and companies that chance had
brought together or good fortune saved from
destruction; resourceful men who had striven
with surrounding anarchy and worsted it,
and, having worsted it, were building their
civilization.... And in the very completeness
of surrounding anarchy, the very depth
of surrounding brutishness, would lie their
opportunity and chance of supremacy, their
power of enforcing their will.</p>
<p class="c006">If such groups, such future nations, existed,
he asked himself how they would build? What
manner of world they would strive for—knowing
what they knew?... This, at
least, was certain: it would not be the world
of their fathers, of their own youth. They
<span class="pageno" id="Page_306">306</span>had seen their civilization laid waste by the
agency of science combined with human
passion; hence, if they rejected the alternative
of ignorance and held to their perilous
treasure of science, their problem was the
mastery of passion.</p>
<p class="c006">He came to believe that the problem—like
all others—had been faced in forgotten generations;
that old centuries had learned the forgotten
lesson that the Ruin was teaching anew.
To a race that had realized the peril of knowledge
there would be two alternatives only;
renunciation—the creed of blind ignorance
and savagery—or the guarding of science as a
secret treasure, removed from all contact with
the flame that is human emotion. There had
been elder and long-past civilizations in which
knowledge was a mystery, the possession and
the privilege of a caste; tradition had come
down to us of ancient wisdom which might
only be revealed to the initiate.... A blind
fear massacred its scientific men, a wiser fear
exalted them and set them apart as initiates.
When science and human emotion between
them had wrought the extreme of destruction
and agony, there passed the reckless and idealistic
dream of a world where all might be
enlightened; the aim and tradition of a social
<span class="pageno" id="Page_307">307</span>system arising out of ruin would be the setting
of an iron barrier between science and human
emotion. That, and not enlightenment of all
and sundry—the admission of the foolish, the
impulsive and the selfish to a share in the
power of destruction. The same need and
instinct of self-preservation which had inspired
the taking of the Vow of Ignorance would
work, in higher and saner minds, for the
training of a caste—an Egyptian priesthood—exempt
from blind passion and the common
impulse of the herd; a caste trained in silence
and rigid self-control, its way of attainment
made hard to the student, the initiate. The
deadly formulæ of mechanics, electricity and
chemistry would be entrusted only to those
who had been purged of the daily common
passions of the multitude; to those who, by
trial after trial, had fettered their natural
impulses and stripped themselves of instinct
and desire.</p>
<p class="c006">So, in times past, had arisen—and might
again arise—a scientific priesthood whose
initiates, to the vulgar, were magicians; a
caste that guarded science as a mystery and
confined the knowledge which is power of
destruction to those who had been trained not
to use it. The old lost learning of dead and
<span class="pageno" id="Page_308">308</span>gone kingdoms was a science shielded by its
devotees from defilement by human emotion;
a pure, cold knowledge, set apart and worshipped
for itself.... And somewhere in the
vastness of the great round world the beginnings
of a priesthood, a scientific caste, might
be building unconsciously on the lines of
ancient wisdom, and laying the foundations
of yet another Egypt or Chaldæa. A State
whose growth would be rooted in the mystery
of knowledge and fear of human passion;
whose culture and civilization would be
moulded by a living and terrible tradition of
catastrophe through science uncontrolled....
And, so long as the tradition was living and
terrible, the initiate would stand guard before
his mysteries, that the world might be saved
from itself; only when humanity had forgotten
its downfall and ruin had ceased to be
even a legend, would the barrier between
science and emotion be withdrawn and knowledge
be claimed as the right of the uncontrolled,
the multitude.</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Till his brain began to fail him he watched,
in dumb interest, the life and development of
the tribe; learning from it more than he had
ever known in the world of his youth of the
<span class="pageno" id="Page_309">309</span>eternal foundations on which life in community
is built. The unending struggle between
the desire for freedom, which makes of man a
rebel, and the need for security, which makes
of him a citizen, was played before his understanding
eyes; he watched parties, castes and
priesthoods in the making and, before he died,
could forecast the beginning of an aristocracy,
a slave class and a tribal hereditary monarchy.
In all things man untraditioned held blindly
to the ways he had forgotten; instinctively,
not knowing whither they led, he trod the
paths that his fathers had trodden before him.</p>
<p class="c006">Most of all he was stirred in his interest and
pity by the life religious of the world around
him; watching it adapt itself, steadily and
naturally, to the needs of a race in its childhood.
As a new generation grew up to its
heritage of ignorance, the foundations of faith
were shifted; as tribal life crystallized, gods
multiplied inevitably and the Heaven ruled
by a Supreme Being gave place to a crude
Valhalla of minor deities. Man, who makes
God in his own image, can only make that
image in the likeness of his own highest type;
which, in a world divided, insecure and predatory,
is the type of the successful warrior; the
Saviour, in a world divided and predatory,
<span class="pageno" id="Page_310">310</span>takes the form of a tribal deity who secures
to his people the enjoyment of their fields by
strengthening their hands against the assaults
and the malice of their enemies. As always
with those who live in constant fear and in
hate of one another, the Lord was a Man of
War; and when Theodore’s first grandson
was received into the tribe, the deity to whom
vows were made in the name of the child was
already a local Jehovah. Faith saw him as a
tribal Lord of Hosts, the celestial captain of
his worshippers; if his worshippers walked
humbly and paid due honour to his name he
would stand before them in the day of battle
and protect them with his shield invisible—would
draw the sword of the Lord and of
Gideon, show himself mightier than the priests
of Baal and overthrow the altars of the Philistines.</p>
<p class="c006">A god whose attributes are those of a
warrior, of necessity is not omnipotent; since
he fights, his authority is partial—assailed
and disputed by those against whom he draws
the sword. A race in its childhood evolved
the deity it needed, a champion and upholder
of his own people; to the tribal warrior the
god to whom an enemy prayed for success was
a rival of his own protector.... So the mind
<span class="pageno" id="Page_311">311</span>primitive argued, more or less directly and
consciously, making God in its image, for its
own needs and purposes; and even in Theodore’s
lifetime the deities worshipped by men
from a distance were not those of his own
country. The jurisdiction of the gods was
limited and the stranger, of necessity, paid
homage to an alien spirit who took pleasure in
an unfamiliar ritual.</p>
<p class="c006">In his lifetime the darkness of Heaven was
unbroken and there emerged no god whose
attribute was mercy and long-suffering; the
Day of Judgment was still too recent, its
memory too clear and overwhelming, to admit
of the idea of a Divine Love or a Father who
had pity on his children. Fear, and fear only,
led his people to the feet of the Lord. The
God of Vengeance of the first generation and
the tribal superman who gradually ousted him
from his pride of place were alike wrathful,
jealous of their despotism and greedily expectant
of mouth-honour. Hence, propitiation
and ignorance were the whole religious duty
of man, and the rites wherewith deity was duly
worshipped were rites of crawling flattery and
sacrifice.... The blood of sinners was acceptable
in the sight of Heaven; the Lord Almighty
had destroyed a world that he might
<span class="pageno" id="Page_312">312</span>slake his vengeance, and his lineal descendants,
the celestial warriors, rejoiced in the slaughter
of those who had borne arms against their
worshippers—in the end, rejoiced in blood for
itself and the savour of the burnt sacrifice.
And a race cowed spiritually (lest worse befall
it) evolved its rites of sacrificial cruelty,
paying tribute to a god who took ceaseless
pleasure in the humbling of his people and
could only be appeased by their suffering.</p>
<p class="c006">There were seasons and regions where
abasement produced its own reaction; when,
for all the savour of sacrificial cruelty, the
gods remained deaf to the prayers of their
worshippers, delivered them into the hands of
their enemies or chastened them with famine
and pestilence. Hope of salvation beaten out
of them, the worshippers, like rats driven into
a corner, ceased to grovel and turned on the
tyrants who had failed them; and the Lord
Almighty Who made the heavens, shrunk to
the dimensions of a local fetish, was upbraided
and beaten in effigy.</p>
<p class="c006">Since it seemed that the new world must in
all things follow in the ways of the old, the
gentler deities who delighted not in blood would
in due time reveal themselves to man grown
capable of mercy. As the memory of judgment
<span class="pageno" id="Page_313">313</span>faded with the centuries—as the earth
waxed fruitful and life was kindlier—humanity
would dare to lift its head from the dust
and the life religious would be more than blind
cringing to a despot. The Heaven of the
future would find room for gods who were
gracious and friendly; for white Baldurs and
Olympians who walk with men and instruct
them; and there would arise prophets whose
message was not vengeance, but a call to
“rejoice in the Lord.” ... And in further
time, it might be, the God who is a Spirit ...
and a Christ.... The rise, the long, slow
upward struggle of the soul of man was as
destined and inevitable as its fall; all human
achievement, material or spiritual, was founded
in the baseness of mire and clay—and rose
towering above its foundations. As the State,
which had its origin in no more than common
fear and hatred, in the end would be honoured
without thought of gain and its flag held
sacred by its sons; so Deity, beginning as
vengeance personified, would advance to a
spiritual Law and a spiritual Love. When
the power of loving returned to the race, it
would cease to abase itself and lift up its
eyes to a Father—endowing its Deity with
that which was best in itself; when it achieved
<span class="pageno" id="Page_314">314</span>and took pleasure in its own thoughts and the
works of its hands, it would see in the Highest
not the Vengeance that destroys but the
Spirit that heals and creates.</p>
<p class="c006">Meanwhile the foundation of the life religious
was, and must be, the timorous virtue
of ignorance, of humble avoidance of inquiry
into the dreadful secrets of God. In Theodore’s
youth he had turned from the orthodox
religions, which repelled by what seemed to
him a fear of knowledge and inquiry; now he
understood that man, being by nature destructive,
can survive only when his powers of
destruction are limited; and that the ignorance
enjoined by priest and bigot had been—and
would be again—an essential need of the
race, an expression of the will to live....
The jealous God who guards his secrets is the
god of the race that survives.</p>
<p class="c006">How many times—(he would wonder)—how
many times since the world began to spin
has man, in his eager search for truth, rushed
blindly through knowledge to the ruin that
means chaos and savagery? How many
times, in his devout, instinctive longing to
know his own nature and the workings of the
Infinite Mind that created him has he wrought
himself weapons that turned to his own destruction?...
<span class="pageno" id="Page_315">315</span>Ignorance of the powers and
forces of nature is a condition of human existence;
as necessary to the continued life of
the race as the breathing of air or the taking of
food into the body. Behind the bench of
zealots who judged Galileo lay the dumb race-memory
of ruin—ruin, perhaps, many times
repeated. They stood, the zealots, for that
ignorance which, being interpreted, is life;
and Galileo for that knowledge which, being
interpreted, is death....</p>
<p class="c006">Many times, it might be, since the world
began to spin, had men called upon the rocks
to cover them from the devils their own hands
had fashioned; many times, it might be, a
remnant had put from it the knowledge it
dared not trust itself to wield—that it might
not fall upon its own weapons, but live, just
live, like the beasts! Behind the injunction
to devout ignorance, behind the ecclesiastical
hatred of science and distrust of brain, lay
more than prejudice and bigotry; the prejudice
and bigotry were but superficial and
outward workings of instinct and the first law
of all, the Law of Self-Preservation.</p>
<p class="c006">With his eyes open to the workings of that
law, folk-tale and myth had long become real
to him—since he saw them daily in the making....
<span class="pageno" id="Page_316">316</span>The dragon that wasted a country with
its breath—how else should a race that knew
naught of chemistry account for the devilry
of gas? And he understood now, why the
legend of Icarus was a legend of disaster, and
Prometheus, who stole fire from Heaven, was
chained to eternity for his daring; he knew,
also, why the angel with a flaming sword
barred the gate of Eden to those who had tasted
of knowledge.... The story of the Garden,
of the Fall of Man, was no more the legend of
his youth; he read it now, with his opened
eyes, as a livid and absolute fact. A fact told
plainly as symbol could tell it by a race that
had put from it all memory of the science
whereby it was driven from its ancient paradise,
its garden of civilization.... How
many times since the world began to spin had
man mastered the knowledge that should
make him like unto God, and turned, in
agony of mind and body, from a power synonymous
with death?</p>
<p class="c006">And how many times more, he wondered—how
many times more?</p>
<hr class="c007"/>
<p class="c006">Theodore Savage lived to be a very old man;
how old in years he could not have said, since,
long before his memory failed him, he had lost
<span class="pageno" id="Page_317">317</span>his count of time. But for fully a decade
before he died he went humped and rheumatic,
leaning on a stick, was blear-eyed, toothless
and wizened; he had outlived all those who
had begun the new world with him, and a son
of his grandson was of those who—when the
time came—dug a trench for his bones and
shovelled loose earth on his head.</p>
<p class="c006">He had no lack of care in his extreme old
age—in part perhaps because the tribe
grew to hold him in awe that increased with
the years; the sole survivor of the legendary
age that preceded the Ruin and Downfall of
Man, he was feared in spite of his helplessness.
He alone of his little community could remember
the Ruin with any comprehension of its
causes; he alone possessed in silence a share
of that hidden and forbidden knowledge which
had brought flaming judgment on the world.
Here and there in the countryside were grey-headed
men, his juniors by years, who could
remember vaguely the horrors of a distant
childhood—the sky afire, the crash of falling
masonry, the panic, the lurking and the starving.
These things they could remember like
a nightmare past ... but only remember,
not explain. Behind Theodore’s bald forehead
and dimmed, oozing eyes lay the understanding
<span class="pageno" id="Page_318">318</span>of why and wherefore denied to those
who dwelt beside him.</p>
<p class="c006">For this reason Theodore Savage was
treated with deference in the days of his senile
helplessness. As he sat, half-blind, in the sun
by the door of his hut, no one ever failed to
greet him with respect in passing; while in
most the greeting was more than a token of
respect or kindliness—the sign and result of a
nervous desire to propitiate. In the end he
was credited with a knowledge of unholy arts,
and the children of the tribe avoided and
shrank from him, frightened by the gossip of
their elders; so that village mothers found
him useful as a bogy, arresting the tantrums
of unruly brats by threats of calling in Old
Bald-Head.</p>
<p class="c006">Even in his lifetime legends clustered thick
about him, and sickness or accident to man or
beast was ascribed to the glance of his purblind
eye or the malice of his vacant brain;
while there was once—though he never knew
or suspected it—an agitated and furtive discussion
as to whether, for the good of the
community, he should not be knocked on the
head. The furtive discussion ended in discussion
only—not because the advocates of
mercy were numerous, but because no man was
<span class="pageno" id="Page_319">319</span>willing to lay violent hands on a wizard, for
fear of what might befall him; and, the interlude
over, the tribe relapsed into its customary
timid respect for its patriarch, its customary
practice of ensuring his goodwill by politeness
and small offerings of victuals. These added
to the old man’s comfort in his latter years—nor
had he any suspicion of the motive that
secured him both deference and dainties.</p>
<p class="c006">With his death the local legends increased
and multiplied; the distorted, varied myths
of the Ruin of Man and its causes showing an
inevitable tendency to group themselves around
one striking and mysterious figure, to make of
that figure a cause and a personification of
the Great Disaster. Theodore Savage, to those
who came after, was Merlin, Frankenstein
and Adam; the fool who tasted of forbidden
fruit, the magician whose arts had brought
ruin on a world, the devil-artisan whose unholy
skill had created monsters that destroyed
him. His grave was an awesome spot, apart
from other graves, which the timorous avoided
after dark; and, long after all trace of it had
vanished, there clung to the neighbourhood a
tradition of haunting and mystery.... To
his children’s children his name was the symbol
of a dead civilization; a civilization that
<span class="pageno" id="Page_320">320</span>had passed so completely from the ken of
living man that its lost achievements, the
manner of its ending, could only be expressed
in symbol.</p>
